Benedetto
GPR spectral analysis for clay content evaluation by the frequency shift method
2013
Journal of Applied Geophysics 97 (2013) 89–96  

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Journal of Applied Geophysics journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jappgeo  GPR spectral analysis for clay content evaluation by the frequency shift method Francesco Benedetto a,⁎, Fabio Tosti b, 1 a b  Signal Processing for Telecommunications and Economics (SP4TE) Lab., University of ROMA TRE, Via della Vasca Navale 84, 00146 Rome, Italy Department of Engineering, University of ROMA TRE, Via Vito Volterra 60, 00146 Rome, Italy  a r t i c l e  i n f o  Article history: Received 18 October 2012 Accepted 23 March 2013 Available online 6 April 2013 Keywords: Ground penetrating radar Super-resolution techniques Numerical interpolators Frequency analysis Pavement monitoring  a b s t r a c t A recent approach relates the shift of the frequency peak of the Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) spectrum with the increasing of the moisture content in the soil. The weakness characterizing this approach is represented by the needs of high resolution signals, whereas GPR spectra are affected by low resolution. The novelty introduced by this work is twofold. First, we evidence that clay content information is present in the location where the maximum amplitude of the GPR spectra occurs. Then, we propose three super resolution methods, namely parabolic, triangular, and sinc-based interpolators, to further reﬁne the location of the frequency peak. In fact, it is really important to be able to ﬁnd this location quite precisely, to obtain accurate estimates of clay content. We show that the peak location can be found best through sinc-interpolation in the frequency domain of the measured data. Our experimental results conﬁrm the effectiveness of the proposed approach to resolve a frequency shift in the GPR spectrum, even for a small amount of clay. © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.  1. Introduction Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) is a geophysical method that uses radar pulses to image the subsurface. This non-destructive method uses electromagnetic radiation and detects the reﬂected signals from subsurface structures. It can detect objects, changes in material, and voids and cracks. GPR is used for many applications in a large number of ﬁelds. In the Earth sciences, it is mainly employed to study bedrock, soils, groundwater, and ice (Jol, 2009; Le Gall et al., 2008). In environmental remediation, it is used to map landﬁlls, contaminant plumes, and other remediation sites (Lambot et al., 2004). In archeology, it is used for mapping archeological features and cemeteries (Lukyanov et al., 2010). Military issues include detection of mines, unexploded ordnance, and tunnels (Gader et al., 2001; Ng et al., 2008). Engineering applications mainly involve non-destructive testing (NDT) of structures and pavements, locating buried structures and utility lines, soils and bedrock monitoring (Benedetto et al., 2012; Le Bastard et al., 2007). In the ﬁeld of civil engineering, advanced GPR systems are increasingly used for road pavement monitoring (Benedetto and Benedetto, 2002; Benedetto and Pensa, 2006; Benedetto et al., 2005; Loizos and Plati, 2007). In this context, GPR has been recently proposed as a method to estimate moisture content in soils (Benedetto, 2010; Benedetto and Benedetto, 2011; Galagedara et al., 2004; Lambot et al., 2006; Maida et al., 2005; Rhebergen, 2003; Serbin and Or, 2004). More in depth, ⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +39 06 57337079; fax: +39 06 57337026. E-mail addresses: francesco.benedetto@uniroma3.it (F. Benedetto), fabio.tosti@uniroma3.it (F. Tosti). 1 Tel.: +39 06 57333261. 0926-9851/$ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jappgeo.2013.03.012  one of the most relevant causes of road pavement damage is often referable to water or clay intrusion in structural layers (Benedetto et al., 2009). Hence, the development of methods for inferring reliable estimates of the moisture (or clay) content is a crucial research ﬁeld involving economic, social and strategic aspects in road safety for a great number of public and private Agencies. In particular, a recent approach was proposed to evaluate moisture content in a porous medium without using core sampling as a destructive mean of calibration, (Benedetto and Benedetto, 2011): a shift of the frequency peak of the GPR spectrum towards lower frequencies as the moisture content increases in the soil has been showed and theoretically demonstrated. The weakness characterizing this approach is represented by the needs of high resolution signals, whereas GPR spectra are affected by low resolution. Hence, the rising requirement for high resoluted techniques leads to speciﬁc demands for improved prediction methods. The novelty introduced in this paper is twofold. Firstly, we demonstrate that also for clay intrusion in soil, a shift of the frequency spectrum towards lower frequencies is expected. Moreover, we have veriﬁed the same systematical trend also for higher order spectral moments, highlighting the correlation between the variance and the kurtosis of the spectrum with the amount of clay. Then, we numerically enhance the resolution of the GPR spectra, proposing three super-resolution techniques, namely parabolic, triangular, and sinc-based interpolators. We show that ﬁnding at which frequency the peak occurs without altering the information in the data can only be done through sinc-interpolation and that a negligible increase of computational complexity is required to implement this approach. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the GPR system model is shown as well as the correlation between GPR  90  F. Benedetto, F. Tosti / Journal of Applied Geophysics 97 (2013) 89–96  spectra and moisture content. In Section 3, the motivations behind the need for high resolution techniques are discussed, and three interpolation techniques are proposed and analyzed. In Section 4, the numerical and experimental results are presented while conclusions are ﬁnally depicted in Section 5. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. GPR system model The GPR sensing technology is a geophysical technique where an electromagnetic pulse is ﬁrst transmitted in a medium, and then the reﬂections are collected by the receiver through antenna(s). A typical GPR equipment is usually characterized by three components: (i) a transmitter that creates a single impulse of a given frequency and power; (ii) one or more antenna(s) for emitting the impulse through the media and capture the reﬂected signals; and (iii) a signal processing acquisition unit down-converting the collected information to a low frequency signal, so that a conventional A/D converter may digitize it for further processing and display. The emitted radar impulse is scattered, retransmitted and reﬂected by any dielectric discontinuity (e.g. different materials, water content, density variations, etc.) in the material under investigation, e.g. road pavement and sub-asphalt layers, such as sub-base and sub-grade. The center frequency and bandwidth of the transmitted pulse depend on the particular antenna(s) and they are chosen accordingly to the required depth of penetration, soil type and size of the anomalies to be detected. A GPR road scan monitoring is performed as a sequence of vertical radar proﬁles (i.e. radargrams). These vertical radargrams are sampled at regular spatial interval, longitudinally or transversally on the road. The time delays, the frequency modulations, and the amplitudes of the reﬂected signals are useful indicators to evaluate the characteristics of the materials.  estimating electromagnetic wave attenuation, based on analysis of centroid frequency downshift of impulse radar signals. More recently, Irving and Knight (2003) further investigated the results of Turner and Siggins (1994), concluding that the frequency-dependent attenuation behavior of many geological materials can be adequately described using one parameter related to the slope of the linear region over the bandwidth of a GPR wavelet. Then, Bradford (2007) investigated the frequency dependence of attenuation with measuring the intrinsic attenuation in reﬂection data, showing that the frequency dependent attenuation analysis can be a strong indicator of variation in bulk subsurface dispersion properties. Hence, the rising requirement for high resolution leads to speciﬁc demands and needs for improved prediction methods (Maida et al., 2005; Shrestha et al., 2001). A new technique, namely combine processing method (CPM), combining the response of the conventional FFT (fast Fourier transform) with that of the MUSIC (multiple signal classiﬁcation) algorithm has been proposed in Shrestha and Arai (2003a,b). It is in fact really important to accurately evaluate the (abscissa of the) maximum of the GPR spectra. In the work by Economou and Vaﬁdis (2010), the amplitude spectrum is approximated with a 10 to 12 degree polynomial in order to improve the GPR signal resolution. Conversely, we are here interested in a slightly different approach as we are trying to approximate near the peak frequency, to relate its position with the quantity of (water or) clay in the analyzed material. Hence, ﬁne estimation of the (abscissa) of the peak is requested. In particular, sub-sample resolution techniques are needed to obtain a resolution better than the sampling period. In fact, the search for the global maximum of the GPR spectra only resolves the estimation of the frequency peak to a resolution equal to the sampling interval of the FFT. It is necessary to use some forms of interpolation, such the three techniques described in the following, to resolve the estimation of the (abscissa of the) frequency peak to a ﬁner resolution. 3.2. Sub-sample resolution techniques  2.2. GPR spectra and moisture content Recently, a new approach has been proposed to evaluate moisture content in a porous medium without preventive calibration, by means of GPR analysis in the frequency domain (Benedetto and Benedetto, 2011). The authors in Benedetto and Benedetto (2011) experimentally observed that the scattered GPR wave is modulated in frequency depending on the moisture contents of the soil. More in depth, as the moisture content increases, a shift of the frequency spectrum towards lower frequencies is expected. Moreover, the same trend has been veriﬁed also for high order spectral moments, highlighting the correlation between the variance, the skewness and the kurtosis of the spectrum with the moisture content. The weak point of this analysis is the low resolution affecting the GPR spectra: in fact, the frequency of the peak in the spectrum decreases with the increasing of moisture content, unless a sensible increasing of the moisture content is needed to appreciate the frequency shift. In the following section, some super-resolution techniques are provided to overcome this problem. 3. GPR super resolution techniques  Different forms of interpolation functions that can ﬁt the GPR spectra in the neighborhood of the coarse estimate (i.e. for small errors approximations) are used. In this paper, we propose three forms of interpolators for sub-sample resolution and a quantitative evaluation of their performance in terms of variance of the estimation error is provided: in particular, main efforts are focused on the parabolic, triangular, and sinc-based interpolation procedures. All these techniques are commonly used in other ﬁelds of engineering, such as in telecommunications for code acquisition purposes in code division multiple access (CDMA) systems (Benedetto and Giunta, 2011; Benedetto et al., 2011) or in image reconstruction processes (Kinsner et al., 2012). In particular, the rationale of the parabolic procedure is to approximate the function under investigation (in this case of study, the GPR spectra) by a parabola, running on three samples in the neighborhood of the maximum (i.e. the coarse estimate). The general equation for the parabola can be expressed as follows: a f2 + b f + c, where a, b and c are real constants, with the apex of the parabola given by –b/2a. In particular, if the maximum of the GPR spectra, C(K), occurs at K = Km, we denote with: z ¼ C ðK m Þ;  x ¼ C ðK m − 1Þ;  x ¼ C ðK m þ 1Þ  ð5Þ  3.1. Motivations There are a lot of works related with the frequency shift for GPR data. Among the most representative references we can found: Bradford (2007), Irving and Knight (2003), Liu et al. (1998), Quan and Harris (1997), and Turner and Siggins (1994). In particular, Turner and Siggins (1994) demonstrated that, for seismic waves, attenuation is an approximately linear function of frequency over the bandwidths of typical subsurface radar pulses, while Quan and Harris (1997) presented a method for estimating seismic attenuation based on frequency shift data. Then, Liu et al. (1998) introduced a method for tomographically  where z is the maximum of the GPR spectra and x and y are the values on either side of the maximum, respectively. The frequency estimation f^P can be expressed as (the abscissa of) the maximum of the parabola ﬁtted over these three samples as follows (see Fig. 1): b 1 y−x f^P ¼ − ¼ − · : 2a 2 y−2·z þ x  ð6Þ  The parabolic interpolation technique relies on the correct identiﬁcation of the coarse maximum at Km. At high signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR)  F. Benedetto, F. Tosti / Journal of Applied Geophysics 97 (2013) 89–96  91  Fig. 1. Rationale of the parabolic interpolation procedure.  the identiﬁcation of the abscissa of the maximum and, consequently, the estimation of the maximum (z) and two side values (x and y) generates some problems. Unfortunately, this will result in a severe degradation in performance at low SNR. Another technique, i.e. the triangular interpolator, allows overcoming this performance degradation. Using the same mathematical notations and deﬁnitions for the GPR spectral samples x, y, and z, let us now explain the triangle interpolation process. According to Fig. 2, we can split the interpolation procedure in two sub-problems, in case the value of x is smaller than y (see Fig. 2a, case 1: x b y) or not (see Fig. 2b, case 2: x > y). In the following, we describe the general procedure that can be applied to case 1 or case 2, changing the value of x with y. The triangle interpolation procedure is herein depicted, step by step. First step: evaluate the equation of the line ﬁtted over the maximum, z, of the cross-correlation, and over the lowest between x (case 1) and y (case 2). Second step: evaluate the equation of the line ﬁtted over the other sample (y, in case 1) or (x, in case 2) with the same correlation coefﬁcient of the line of step one, and opposite sign. Third step: The new detector is obtained as the (abscissa of the) vertex of the triangle ﬁtted over the three samples x, y, and z, as previously described (Fig. 2). In conclusion, the frequency peak estimation ^f T (in both cases) can be expressed as (the abscissa of) the vertex of the triangle ﬁtted over these three samples as follows:  f^T  8 1 y−x > < · ; 2 z−x ¼ 1 y−x > : · ; 2 z−y  if ðx b yÞ if ðx ≥ yÞ  :  ð7Þ  data is not aliased in the time domain, which is a necessary condition anyway (Schanze, 1995). Hence, sinc-interpolation in the frequency domain of the measured data (which interpolation is easily obtained by padding the time-domain data with sufﬁcient number of zeros) allows obtaining accurate estimates of clay content. In particular, if data is recorded in the time domain with pulse radars, the time-step determines the maximum frequency, but the step frequency is determined by the maximum time that can be chosen at any desired time instant assuming a proper measurement has been made to the time instant where the GPR signal was zero again. Suppose this measurement contains M time-samples and for accurate peak location determination N (>M) samples would be required, then the trace can be padded with (N–M) zeros and then FFT transformed (Brigham, 1998). From this, we can precisely ﬁnd the location of the absolute maximum and hence the frequency where this maximum occurs. If data is recorded in the frequency domain, then ﬁrst an inverse FFT (IFFT) is used to transform the data to the time domain, then the result is padded with sufﬁcient number of zeros and transformed back with an FFT to the frequency domain. The necessity to determine this location accurately is shown to be important to determine small amounts of clay content. Finally, it has to be underlined that a negligible increase of computational complexity and processing throughput is required to implement this approach. In fact, the computational complexity of FFT (over N data) is of the order of N log2 N, whereas it reduces to the order of log2 N by parallel processing schemes (Oppenheim and Schafer, 1975).  4. Numerical results and discussion It has to be noted that the estimator deﬁned in Eq. (7) is the unique parameter deﬁned by a mathematical expression depending on the operating case x b y or x ≥ y. Unfortunately, parabolic and linear interpolations add information to the data and therefore change the data: this should be avoided to trust the outcome. Hence, ﬁnding at which frequency the peak occurs without altering the information in the data can only be done through sinc-interpolation (Yaroslavsky, 1997), where sinc(x) = sin(x) / x. In particular, sinc-interpolation is a standard signal processing technique that is exact frequency interpolation, assuming the measured  Several analyses were carried out to validate the proposed approach (explained in the previous sections). In particular, Ground-coupled Radar antennas (RIS/MF system produced by IDS S.p.A., Italy) were used for GPR analysis. GPR operates with two antennas with dominant frequencies about 0.6 GHz and a time interval of 7.8125 × 10−2 ns. The number of vertical radargrams depends on the dimension of the GPR scanning on the horizontal axis. After collecting the GPR data, we have performed the frequency-based analysis in post processing. The GPR has been calibrated in standard conditions extracting the spectra of  92  F. Benedetto, F. Tosti / Journal of Applied Geophysics 97 (2013) 89–96  Fig. 2. a. Rationale of the triangular interpolation procedure (case x b y). b. Rationale of the triangular interpolation procedure (case x > y).  reﬂected signals over a metal plate (total reﬂection) and over a sample of known dry material previously classiﬁed and without any clay. The end-reﬂection of the antenna (or system reverberation) was measured from a free-space experiment and removed, subtracting the average trace (i.e. background removal), before any processing (e.g. Benedetto and Benedetto, 2011). Background removal is, in fact, the ﬁrst preprocessing stage and it is here used as the simplest technique, before the real data processing, to clean up the GPR proﬁles (Khan and Al-Nuaimy, 2010). The sample is located in a box 0.40 m × 0.40 m and 0.13 m high, so that the tested sample of soil is 0.33 m × 0.33 m  and 0.10 m thick. The box is impervious and electrically isolated. The laboratory conﬁguration remains absolutely the same during all the tests. In particular, the so-called Misto della Magliana soil (i.e. an alluvial soil with low ultraﬁne soil fractions) has been used for the tests, increasing the clay content in sequential steps. Fig. 3 shows the GPR spectra of the tested soil in presence of clay intrusion from 7% (Fig. 3a), 14% (Fig. 3b) and 22% (Fig. 3c), and ﬁnally with a percentage of clay equal to 30% (Fig. 3d). Results show that, also in presence of clay intrusion, a shift of the frequency spectrum towards lower frequencies is observed, as in the case of Benedetto  F. Benedetto, F. Tosti / Journal of Applied Geophysics 97 (2013) 89–96  93  Fig. 3. GPR spectra of the tested soil in presence of clay intrusion for: a) 7% of clay; b) 14% of clay; c) 22% of clay; d) 30% of clay.  and Benedetto (2011) for moisture content in soils. This frequency shift is not only due to scattering but also to attenuation which increases in the presence of water or clay. This makes higher frequency harmonics to attenuate faster. Then, the spectrum corresponds to the trace and not to a part of it. Thus, this method could be used for the lateral (e.g. not in depth) study of clay content, representing a qualitative estimation of the amount of clay in the soil. Following the same methodology as in Benedetto and Benedetto (2011), we have evaluated three parameters of interest of the GPR spectrum: the variance, the skewness, and the kurtosis, to highlight the correlation between these spectral indicators and the clay content. Fig. 4 shows the correlation between the variance of the GPR spectrum and the clay intrusion in the soil, while Fig. 5 shows the behavior of the skewness. All these higher order moments are evaluated for the three different signal processing techniques, namely the recently introduced CPM approach and the conventional FFT and MUSIC methods. It is easy to observe from these graphs that the same previous trend remains, including the case of higher order spectral moments. The graph referring to the kurtosis is not shown for the sake of compactness since no correlation  Fig. 4. Variance versus the clay content increases for all the tested super-resolution methods.  is evident, as already noted in Benedetto and Benedetto (2011). Fig. 6 shows the values of the frequency peak (obtained through the CPM method) and the corresponding clay content. Unfortunately, whereas  Fig. 5. Skewness versus the clay content increases for all the tested super-resolution methods.  Fig. 6. Values of the frequency peak (obtained through the CPM method) and the corresponding clay content.  94  F. Benedetto, F. Tosti / Journal of Applied Geophysics 97 (2013) 89–96  Fig. 7. a. Sinc-interpolation method after zero-padding and with a FFT of length N = 512. b. Sinc-interpolation method after zero-padding and with a FFT of length N = 1024. c. Sinc-interpolation method after zero-padding and with a FFT of length N = 4096.  F. Benedetto, F. Tosti / Journal of Applied Geophysics 97 (2013) 89–96  95  References  Fig. 8. Values of the frequency peak (obtained through the sinc-interpolation method, with three FFT lengths) and the corresponding clay content.  resolution affecting the GPR spectra has been enhanced exploiting cumbersome signal processing techniques (such as MUSIC and CPM), we still need a sensible increasing of the clay content to appreciate a visible frequency shift. As a consequence, we have now exploited the sinc-interpolation method to accurately evaluate the frequency peak location, to determine small amounts of clay content. In particular, the acquired GPR radargrams have been ﬁrst zero-padded, and then three FFTs of length 1024, 2048 and 4096, respectively, were performed. Fig. 7 shows the results obtained through the sinc-interpolation method zero-padding FFTs of different length N: in particular, N = 512 in Fig. 7(a), N = 1024 in Fig. 7(b), and N = 4096 in Fig. 7(c). Fig. 8 illustrates the effectiveness of this method to resolve a frequency shift in the GPR spectrum, even for a corresponding amount of clay less than 2–3%. Obviously, increasing the length of the FFT increases the resolution of the interpolation method and the computational complexity too. However, it has to be noted that it does not take too much time to implement this form of interpolation. Actually, the computational complexity of N-FFTs is easily affordable in non-real-time post-processing and drastically reduces in presence of parallel processing schemes.  5. Conclusions This paper has addressed the problem of enhancing the resolution of GPR signals in the frequency domain. We have ﬁrst evidenced that clay intrusion in the soil can be quantitatively evaluated by means of the frequency shift method. Subsequently, we have proposed three sub-sample super resolution methods, namely parabolic, triangular, and sinc-based interpolators, to further reﬁne the estimate of the frequency peak. In particular, we have showed that the peak location can be found best through sinc-interpolation in the frequency domain of the measured data. Our experimental results have conﬁrmed the effectiveness of the proposed approach to resolve a frequency shift in the GPR spectrum, even with small amounts of clay content (less than 2–3%). Further researches will be devoted to evaluate the dependence of the frequency shift not only on propagation effects (i.e. scattering, attenuation), but also on the initial creation of the electromagnetic wave within the soil.  Acknowledgment The authors would like to thank Prof. G. Giunta of the University of Roma Tre for his interesting comments and suggestions on the numerical interpolators. Moreover, the authors would like to thank the reviewers for their comments that really helped in improving the paper.  Benedetto, A., 2010. Water content evaluation in unsaturated soil using GPR signal analysis in the frequency domain. Journal of Applied Geophysics 71 (1), 26–35. Benedetto, A., Benedetto, F., 2002. GPR experimental evaluation of subgrade soil characteristics for rehabilitation of roads. SPIE proceedings series 4758 (1), 708–714. Benedetto, A., Benedetto, F., 2011. Remote sensing of soil moisture content by GPR signal processing in the frequency domain. IEEE Sensors Journal 11 (10), 2432–2441. Benedetto, A., Pensa, S., 2006. Indirect diagnosis of pavement structural damages using surface GPR reﬂection techniques. Journal of Applied Geophysics 62 (2), 107–123. Benedetto, F., Giunta, G., 2011. A fast time-delay estimator of PN signals. IEEE Transactions on Communications 59 (8), 2057–2062. Benedetto, A., Benedetto, F., DeBlasiis, M.R., Giunta, G., 2005. Reliability of signal processing technique for pavement damages detection and classiﬁcation using ground penetrating radar. IEEE Sensors Journal 5 (3), 471–480. Benedetto, A., D'Amico, F., Fattorini, F., 2009. Measurement of moisture under road pavement: a new approach based on GPR signal processing in frequency domain. Int. Workshop Adv. Ground Penetrat. Radar, Granada, Spain. Benedetto, F., Giunta, G., Bucci, S., 2011. A uniﬁed approach for time delay estimation in spread spectrum communications. IEEE Transactions on Communications 59 (12), 3421–3429. Benedetto, A., Benedetto, F., Tosti, F., 2012. GPR application for geotechnical stability of transportation infrastructure. Nondestructive Testing and Evaluation Journal 27 (3), 253–262. Bradford, J., 2007. Frequency-dependent attenuation analysis of ground-penetrating radar data. Geophysics 72 (3), J7–J16. Brigham, E.O., 1998. The Fast Fourier Transform and Its Applications. Ed. Prentice Hall, New Jersey. Economou, N., Vaﬁdis, A., 2010. Spectral balancing GPR data using a time variant bandwidth in t–f domain. Geophysics 75 (3), J19–J27. Gader, P.D., Mystkowski, M., Zhao, Yunxin, 2001. Landmine detection with ground penetrating radar using hidden Markov models. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 39 (6), 1231–1244. Galagedara, L., Parkin, G., Redman, D., 2004. Measuring and modeling of GPR ground wave depth penetration under transient soil moisture conditions. International Conference on Ground Penetrating Radar 505–508. Irving, J.D., Knight, R.J., 2003. Removal of wavelet dispersion from ground-penetrating radar data. Geophysics 68, 960–970. Jol, H., 2009. Ground Penetrating Radar Theory and Applications. Ed. Elsevier Science, Amsterdam. Khan, U.S., Al-Nuaimy, W., 2010. Background removal from GPR data using eigenvalues. Proc. of the 13th Int. Conf. on Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR), pp. 1–5. Kinsner, M., Capson, D.W., Spence, A.D., 2012. Accurate measurement of surface grid intersections from close-range video sequences. IEEE Trans. on Instrumentation and Measurement 61 (4), 1019–1028. Lambot, S., Slob, E.C., van den Bosch, I., Stockbroeckx, B., Vanclooster, M., 2004. Modeling of ground-penetrating Radar for accurate characterization of subsurface electric properties. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 42 (11), 2555–2568. Lambot, S., Weihermüller, L., Huisman, J.A., Vereecken, H., Vanclooster, M., Slob, E.C., 2006. Analysis of air-launched ground-penetrating radar techniques to measure the soil surface water content. Water Resources Research 42 (W11403). Le Bastard, C., Baltazart, V., Wang, Yide, Saillard, J., 2007. Thin-pavement thickness estimation using GPR with high-resolution and superresolution methods. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 45 (8), 2511–2519. Le Gall, A., Ciarletti, V., Berthelier, J.-J., Reineix, A., Guiffaut, C., Ney, R., Dolon, F., Bonaime, S., 2008. An imaging HF GPR using stationary antennas: experimental validation over the Antarctic ice sheet. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 46 (12), 3975–3986. Liu, L., Lane, J.W., Quan, Y., 1998. Radar attenuation tomography using the centroid frequency downshift method. Journal of Applied Geophysics 40, 106–116. Loizos, A., Plati, C., 2007. Accuracy of ground penetrating radar horn antenna technique for sensing pavement subsurface. IEEE Sensors Journal 7 (5), 842–850. Lukyanov, S.P., Stepanov, R.A., Stukach, O.V., 2010. One example of classing and extracting information from GPR images for the archeology. International Radar Symposium 1–4. Maida, A., Pennock, S., Shepherd, P., 2005. Improving ground penetrating radar signal analysis through FFT superimposition. IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium 4B, 118–121. Ng, W., Chan, T.C.T., So, H.C., Ho, K.C., 2008. Particle ﬁltering based approach for landmine detection using ground penetrating radar. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 46 (11), 3739–3755. Oppenheim, A.V., Schafer, R.W., 1975. Digital Signal Processing. Prentice Hall, New Jersey. Quan, Y., Harris, J.M., 1997. Seismic attenuation tomography using the frequency shift method. Geophysics 62, 895–905. Rhebergen, J.B., 2003. Results of, measurements, processing and modeling of GPR data showing the effect of SOU moisture content on landmine detection. Int. Work. AdvGPR, Delft, The Netherlands. Schanze, T., 1995. Sinc interpolation of discrete periodic signals. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 43 (6), 1502–1503. Serbin, G., Or, D., 2004. Ground-penetrating radar measurement of soil water content dynamics using a suspended horn antenna. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 42 (8), 1695–1705. Shrestha, S.M., Arai, I., 2003a. High resolution image reconstruction by GPR using MUSIC and SAR processing method for landmine detection. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium Proceedings 4, 2921–2923.  96  F. Benedetto, F. Tosti / Journal of Applied Geophysics 97 (2013) 89–96  Shrestha, S.M., Arai, I., 2003b. Signal processing of ground penetrating radar using spectral estimation techniques to estimate the position of buried targets. EURASIP J. on Applied Signal Processing 12, 1198–1209. Shrestha, S.M., Arai, I., Miwa, T., Tomizawa, Y., 2001. Signal processing of ground penetrating radar using super resolution technique. Proceedings of the IEEE 300–305.  Turner, G., Siggins, A.F., 1994. Constant Q attenuation of subsurface radar pulses. Geophysics 59, 1192–1200. Yaroslavsky, L.P., 1997. Efﬁcient algorithm for discrete sinc interpolation. Applied Optics 36 (2), 460–463.  