Sukhobok
The GPR attribute and texture analysis for automated reflection picking applied to GPR railway and roadway subgrade inspection
2017
DAAD Research Proposal

The GPR attribute and texture analysis for automated reflection picking applied to GPR railway and roadway subgrade inspection
Keywords: 
subgrade inspection, nondestructive testing (NDT), Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR), common-offset method, common midpoint (CMP) method, attribute analysis, texture analysis, automatic boundary layer detection, velocity analysis

Introduction	
According to the Transport Strategy of the Russian Federation up to 2030 [1], it is necessary to develop and introduce innovative technologies in construction, reconstruction and maintenance of the transport infrastructure, and to develop scientific research to increase the safety of the transport system. Current transport infrastructure is characterized by a significant increase in vehicle speed and load for structures, rather long roads, especially built more than hundred years ago. In this connection, the task of organization of a monitoring system of geotechnical transport infrastructure using non-destructive techniques is of actual importance.
The development of non-destructive techniques (NDT) is demanded for railway and roadway subsurface inspection, which is important for transport safety. Among NDT methods ground-penetrating radar (GPR) is one of the most frequently used. It is rapid, cost-effective, and allows to perform an inspection without great impact on traffic [2]. This method is currently applied in many different areas such as geological studies, geotechnical engineering, civil engineering, archeology, mine detection, etc. [3, 4, 5] Relating to subgrade and bedrock surveys, GPR can be used to determine layers boundaries and the soil types, to evaluate the ground water level, to detect local anomalies, etc. [6]
The key step of GPR survey is data interpretation, performed to produce a subgrade and bedrock lithological model. Data interpretation is usually manually performed. It has such disadvantages as low processing speed, subjectivity and dependence on the interpreter’s experience [6]. At the current stage, the GPR method requires development and introduction of automatic data processing techniques applied to the area of subgrade GPR surveys.

Literature review
The majority of research works on the GPR method applied for transport structures are devoted to road structure evaluation [6–10] and railway ballast condition assessment [11–13]. Research works on subgrade surveys are few [6].
In spite of the variety of tasks, solved with the help of the GPR method, two main problems exist in this field: picking the recorded reflection events and calculating electromagnetic wave velocity in each layer. Velocity is an essential parameter to transform the GPR data time scale into depth scale.
Typically GPR surveys are conducted in a common offset mode. It means that GPR unit has a constant distance between its transmitting and receiving antennae. In this case, velocity is defined by diffraction hyperbola ﬁtting [4, 15]. But frequently hyperbolas are located in the upper layer of the section and non-uniformly along the section, giving a reduction of accuracy [16]. Such solution as an installation of radar detectable geosynthetics under ballast layer [17] is not universal.
Another method, multi-offset acquisition implies that the distance between the antennae is changed. Common midpoint (CMP) technique, when both antennae are moved equidistantly from the midpoint, is a specific case of multi-offset acquisition [14]. The most popular technique to estimate the velocities from CMP data is the semblance analysis. It gives RMS velocities that are transformed into interval velocities using Dix inversion [18]. The semblance analysis is usually combined with ﬁtting of hyperbolic reﬂections [19, 20]. The papers [21, 22] describe a modification of semblance analysis in case of air-coupled measurements with a small antenna offset. The paper [23] assesses the accuracy of the multi-channel GPR method. It strongly depends on the conﬁguration of the GPR equipment. Papers [16, 24, 25, 26, 27] describe different GPR unit constructions, based on the multi-offset acquisition. Despite all the benefits of the multi-offset technique, the main problem is subjectivity in the detection of hyperbolic reflections even when the semblance analysis is used. The same problem reveals itself while picking interface boundaries, which significantly increases the time needed for interpretation.
In the recent years, some works devoted to the development of effective algorithms, making the picking boundary process automated have appeared. Some of the ideas are based on GPR traces spectral analysis [28]. There also exist works devoted to machine learning methods. For example, an application of convolutional neural networks for data processing is widely spread [29, 30]. There is research in the sphere of signal classification [31]. Works [32, 33] describe the support vector machines (SVM) method to detect the voids and cracks within the pavement. Work [34] describes the Viola-Jones learning algorithm for pattern recognition to localize reﬂection hyperbolas in GPR data automatically. Work [35] describes the usage of this method jointly with artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) and support vector machines (SVM) for the discrimination of layer boundaries between different rocks. 
Another promising approach is automation of detecting reflections along GPR profiles based on the attribute analysis and the texture analysis. For example, works [2, 36] are devoted to the usage of the attribute analysis. The authors applied it to real pavement [2], glaciological and archaeological [36] GPR surveys. Works [37–41] describe this method in different GPR applications as well. The texture attribute analysis application is presented in works [42, 43]. 
Accordingly, the attribute and texture analyses seem to be promising for both automatic picking of interface boundaries and for estimation of velocities from CMP data in subgrade GPR inspection.

Aim of the research project
This work is aimed at the development of an automatic detection of hyperbolic reflections procedure (after testing with CMP technique) and automatic subgrade and bedrock stratification procedure (after testing with common offset technique), based on the attribute and texture analyses.

Methodology
Attribute analysis procedure is based on computing the cosine of the instantaneous phase using Discrete Hilbert Transform operator [2, 36]. Texture analysis is based on computing second-order statistical measures of textural characteristics such as energy, homogeneity, cluster, contrast, and entropy. To calculate them the gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) algorithm [39, 42] will be used. Besides, an additional criteria, based on the GPR traces spectral and wavelet analysis, will be used during algorithm development. In particular, spectrograms will be computed and wavelet transform will be produced [44]. 
An algorithm will be developed to fulfill two different purposes: to detect hyperbolic reflections (from common midpoint GPR data) and to automate picking boundaries (from common offset data). For checking the correctness of algorithm traditional velocity semblance analysis [14, 19] will be applied.
This algorithm has to be inlined into the GeoReader software developed by applicant (georeader.ru) [45], that allows of exporting raw data, conducting data preprocessing, wavelet and statistical GPR traces analysis and semblance analysis for CMP data; building a velocity model; converting from two-way travel time to depth; and applying topographic correction (fig. 1).
The algorithm will be written in Python programming language [46]. Graphical user interface (GUI) will be made using PyQt [47] and matplotlib [48] libraries. Mathematical calculations will be made using numpy library [49]. 
The developed algorithm will be tested using experimental and synthetic data. 
Experimental works will be performed on railway or roadway subgrade site. The length of the experimental site should be no less than 50 meters. Maximum subgrade height should be at least 5 meters. It is necessary to have information about a lithological structure of the subgrade and bedrock, such as ground truth holes that could be accurately correlated with the GPR data. Besides, it is necessary to carry out a topographical survey of the experimental site and to create a longitudinal profile along the center line and two cross-sectional profiles at a distance of 20 meters from each other.
Data acquisition will be obtained with the GPR equipment capable of working in both common offset mode and CMP mode. GPR units have to be equipped with portable antennae of 100 – 500 MHz frequencies. The choice of a GPR unit and particular antennae frequency will depend on the equipment available from the receiving party, as well as on the height of the subgrade and upper layers bedrock depth. It is also expedient to conduct a series of experiments with air-coupled antennae and another one with ground-coupled antennae. It is necessary to link the position of the GPR unit to the distance.
Common offset mode testing will be performed in the longitudinal and cross-sectional directions (fig. 2). Longitudinal direction testing will be performed along the center line, on the subgrade shoulders and on the toes of slopes. Cross-sectional direction testing will be performed along the whole subgrade cross-section, stepping 10 meters outside subgrade borders. Cross-sectional direction testings will be carried out at a distance of 20 meters from each other, with a step not exceeding 0.1 meters. CMP testings will be performed along the center line, on the toes of slopes, and, if possible, on the slopes (fig. 2).
After the field survey, the obtained data have to be preprocessed. The preprocessing sequence will consist of data editing, time-zero correction, time drift removal, direct current signal (DC) removal, band-pass filtering, amplitude decay analysis and background removal [4, 5, 8].
In case using air-coupled antennae during common offset midpoint testing, it is necessary to take into consideration the refraction at the surface [21]. While processing GPR data obtained from CMP testing along the slopes it is necessary to take into account dip of the reflectors. The results of velocity modeling have to be linked with borehole data. It is also necessary to perform topographic correction and time to depth conversion for longitudinal and cross-sectional GPR common offset profiles.
The synthetic GPR will be calculated using the finite-diﬀerence time-domain (FDTD) numerical modeling method with gprMax open source software [50]. The model has to correspond to the experimental site.

Time table
Getting acquainted with the GPR equipment and software available, selection of an appropriate GPR unit and antennae for experimental testings, modification of the GeoReader software for import of raw data
Selection of the experimental site
Development of a model using the Finite-Diﬀerence Time-Domain (FDTD) method with gprMax software
Experimental subgrade GPR survey applying the common offset and common midpoint modes
GPR data preprocessing, semblance analysis
Development of the algorithm for automatic detection of hyperbolic reflections and automatic subgrade and bedrock stratification, based on the attribute and texture analysis; development of a software module in Python programming languag
Application of the developed algorithm to synthetic and experimental data; algorithm testing and modification
Integration of the algorithm into GeoReader software

Figures:
Examples of GPR data processing using GeoReader software [45]
Design of the experiment: CO_long – common offset testing in the longitudinal directions, CO_cross – common offset testing in the cross-sectional directions, CMP – common midpoint testings
