Economou
Advanced Ground Penetrating Radar Signal Processing Techniques
2016
Signal Processing

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Signal Processing journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/sigpro  Editorial  Advanced Ground Penetrating Radar Signal Processing Techniques  1. Introduction Ground penetrating radar (GPR) is a non-destructive geophysical method that uses electromagnetic waves to image the subsurface. A typical GPR system has three main components: transmitter and receiver, directly connected to the transmitting and receiving antennas, and a control unit. Electromagnetic pulses are transmitted into the subsurface and the earth response is recorded. The GPR method is characterized by the rapidly decaying amplitude of the electromagnetic waves, together with the loss of the relevant higher frequency harmonics. Thus, GPR data are highly non-stationary and processing is inherently a challenge. GPR technology has seen tremendous progress in its range of applications, as well as in the analysis and processing algorithms, over the past 20 years. GPR applications currently include sedimentology, ground-water contamination, glaciology, archaeology and cultural-heritage management, civil and geotechnical engineering, planetary exploration, demining, and more. Even though there is an undoubted promise for this technique regarding the most of the above-mentioned applications, the most successful results have come from glaciology, archaeology and civil engineering. GPR signal processing and subsequent display/presentation of the results are of paramount importance to GPR operators and end-users. They should be considered as an integrated part of the methodology, as well as a prerequisite for successful surveying and data interpretation. In April 2013, the COST (European COoperation in Science and Technology) Action TU1208 “Civil Engineering Applications of Ground Penetrating Radar” ofﬁcially started. This Action focuses on the exchange of scientiﬁc-technical knowledge and experience of GPR techniques in civil engineering. It has established several new active links between universities, research institutes, companies and end users working in the ﬁeld, fostering and accelerating its long-term development in Europe. It is also having a strong impact in promoting throughout Europe a wider and more effective use of this safe and non-destructive inspection method. The Action is now in progress and the leading Guest Editors of this Special Issues are coordinating the scientiﬁc activities of Project 3.4, focused on the development of advanced GPR data-processing algorithms. Such Project is part of Working Group 3 of the Action, which is dealing with the improvement and implementation of accurate and fast electromagnetic-scattering methods for the characterization of GPR scenarios, imaging and inversion techniques, and effective data-processing algorithms for the elaboration of GPR data collected during civilhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sigpro.2016.07.032 0165-1684/& 2016 Published by Elsevier B.V.  engineering surveys. We are very honored to report here a brief comment about the COST program and the Action TU1208 by the Chair, Dr. Lara Pajewski, and the Editorial Coordinator, Prof. Andrea Benedetto: “COST is the longest-running European framework supporting transnational cooperation among researchers, engineers and scholars across Europe and beyond. It is a unique means for them to jointly develop their own ideas and new initiatives across all ﬁelds in science and technology. By faithfully following COST's inclusiveness policy and key principles, and by successfully exploiting all COST networking tools, the Action TU1208 has created a wide, pan-European, trans- and multidisciplinary network, where useful knowledge has been generated and shared. A critical mass of people with experience and competences in the GPR ﬁeld has been built, according to the European Research Area goals: more than 300 experts are actively participating to TU1208, from 147 Institutes in 28 COST Member Countries, a Cooperating State, 6 Near Neighbor Countries and 11 International Partner Countries. The network has also set up fruitful cooperation with renowned European and national associations. Research activities carried out in TU1208 include all aspects of the GPR technology and methodology: design, realization and testing of radar systems and antennas; development and testing of surveying procedures for the monitoring and inspection of natural and manmade structures, in civil engineering and beyond; integration of GPR with other non-destructive testing methods; and ﬁnally, advancement of electromagnetic modeling, imaging, inversion and data-processing techniques, where the latter are the main subject of this Special Issue. Thoughtful processing and proper graphical representation of collected data are essential steps of a GPR survey, in all application areas: if properly carried out, they crucially facilitate radargram analysis and interpretation. Additionally, although in many cases radargrams are still inspected with a qualitative approach (and a number of real problems can be satisfactorily addressed in this way), dataprocessing techniques are evolving fast and the quantitative analysis of GPR results is increasingly expanding. Apparently, the ability to translate electromagnetic information stored into radar signals into other useful application-speciﬁc engineering or scientiﬁc quantities is of great importance: it enables a more advanced employment of GPR in its consolidated application ﬁelds, besides extending the usability of this technique towards new horizons. In this promising and variegated framework, the Action TU1208 has decided to publish a Special Issue focused on cutting-edge data-processing techniques for GPR, and related topics. We are truly grateful to the Chief Guest Editors and co-Guest  Editorial / Signal Processing ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎  2  Editors for their proactive contribution to COST Action TU1208 and for all the hard work they have done to compose this most interesting collection of excellent papers, as well as to the Authors who decided to publish the outcomes of their best-quality research work in this volume”. Our intent was to collect into this Special Issue relevant research contributions from academics and industry professionals in the GPR signal processing area, as well as from practitioners and engineers working in the ﬁeld of GPR. This Special Issue will also serve these scientiﬁc communities by presenting the state of the art in GPR signal processing methodologies, and fostering future research in this area. We collected papers related to the most recent advanced GPR signal processing techniques used in the principal application ﬁelds (e.g. civil and environmental engineering). In particular, submissions came from an open call for papers and ﬁnally 12 papers (out of 17 submissions, with an acceptance rate of 70%) were selected after rigorous reviews. These papers cover topics of signal processing such as increase of GPR data temporal resolution by deconvolution, denoising and improving the interpretation of GPR sections by the simulation of GPR data, detection and classiﬁcation of subsurface targets, assessment of calibration procedures, and interferometric imaging approach. Below is a brief presentation of the articles included in this special issue.  2. Overview of the articles 2.1. Review articles Benedetto et al. in [1] provide a review article on the main signal processing techniques employed in road engineering using GPR. Starting with the theoretical basis of GPR, they provide the main GPR data processing techniques utilized in road monitoring they present a number of signiﬁcant and relevant GPR applications. They conclude that, the proper performance of a GPR survey on the site is the fundamental and most important factor to pursue, in order to emphasize the effectiveness of the data processing. Forte and Pipan in [2] focus on the multi – offset data acquisition methods and Multi Fold (MF) data processing techniques similarities and differences through examples taken from different subsurface and target conditions in order to provide a comprehensive and critical review. MF GPR, even though laborious at both acquisition and processing stages, allows obtaining enhanced subsurface images and quantitative information about physical properties of the materials if compared with the usual Commonoffset techniques. The EM velocity ﬁeld represents the most important information that can be extracted from ﬁeld data as several other properties can be derived or correlated thanks to the existing theoretical physical laws as well as empirical or semiempirical equations. Multi-channel acquisition, full wave-form inversion, pre-stack depth migration, azimuthal and polarimetric analysis, are among the many topics in current and future research that are brieﬂy reviewed to provide some highlights of the forthcoming developments in GPR methods. 2.2. Simulation of GPR data Warren and Giannopoulos in [3] present an investigation of the radiation characteristics of a high-frequency ground coupled GPR antenna in lossless homogeneous and, for the ﬁrst time, in lossy heterogeneous environments using detailed FDTD models. They compare the results of different values of dielectric constant, and different types and distributions of realistic soil properties, and  observe signiﬁcant variations in the magnitude and pattern shape of the radiated energy of the antenna for the case of lossy heterogeneous environments. They also conclude that the simulations that included only an inﬁnitesimal dipole model produced a very similar radiated energy distribution to those that used the full antenna model. 2.3. GPR data directional ﬁltering Wang and Liu in [4] discuss a new application of Shearlet transform (ShT) for ground penetrating radar (GPR) to remove the direct wave arrivals and suppress random noise by utilizing multiscale and multi-direction properties of ShT. Furthermore, Curvelet transform, whose characteristics are similar to ShT, is also discussed for suppressing random noise, and it is demonstrated that the latter outperforms the former. ShT also proves to produce better performance in removing the direct arrivals of the GPR signal than the moving average and mean ﬁlter methods usually implemented for this application. Tzanis in [5] introduces the curveletiform directional ﬁlter and its application to edge detection in general images and fracture detection in GPR data. The ﬁlter is essentially a curvelet with adjustable anisotropy that can be tuned on any given wavenumber: while retaining the properties of curvelets, it is not bound to the scaling rules of the Curvelet Frame. The curveletiform can efﬁciently recover information of speciﬁc scale and geometry from straight or curved edges in general images. In geotechnical GPR data it may distinguish reﬂections from small and large fractures, discriminate between groups of fractures, resolve fracture density and aid the assessment of damage in rocks and structures. 2.4. Resolution enhancement Zhao and Al-Qadi in [6] exploit both synthetic and real GPR data in order to apply several types of regularized deconvolution methods (i.e., zeroth-, ﬁrst-, and second-order Tikhonov; and total variation regularization) for the separation of thin asphalt layers’ boundaries reﬂections. By demonstrating that the “Lcurve” criterion can be applied to both zeroth-order Tikhonov and total variation regularization methods in order to ﬁnd the appropriate regularization parameter, they conclude that these two methods can effectively increase the GPR signal range resolution even when the second pulse from asphalt pavement overlay is small. Accurate impulse distance can be obtained when the impulse distance is larger than 0.51 ns and when the layer thickness is not thinner than 25.5 mm, the absolute layer thickness estimation error is less than 1 mm, which is well below the construction tolerance. Sun et al. in [7] study time delays and interface roughness estimation with coherent backscattered echoes. After applying the interpolated spatial smoothing technique to decorrelate the received echoes, they proposed a modiﬁed MUSIC algorithm, which is able to estimate the time delays without knowing the frequency behavior from roughness. The inﬂuence of the interface roughness was also estimated by Maximum Likelihood (MLE) method. These algorithms are applied for the evaluation of the pavement. The performance of the proposed algorithms, tested on data from Method of Moments (MoM), showed good performance for time delays and interface roughness estimation. 2.5. Subsurface target detection Feng et al. in [8] apply the model-based Freeman decomposition to full polarimetric GPR data to improve the subsurface target classiﬁcation and to overcome the ambiguity in interpreting  Editorial / Signal Processing ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎  migrated GPR sections which contain similar reconstructed imaging shapes from different geometrical features. They conclude that it is better to use both the geometrical feature and polarimetric information to classify targets. Consequently, the classiﬁcation ability of GPR can be improved, depending on the geometrical feature obtained by migration imaging technique and the polarimetric information obtained by model-based Freeman decomposition technique. Hoarau et al. in [9] develop an algorithm in order to detect and locate pipes buried between 1 and 3 m underground by taking into account the estimation of the dielectric constant. The proposed detector, based on an Adaptive Normalized Matched Filter (ANMF) depends on a signal of interest, this being the theoretical response of a buried pipe. They investigate the impact of the regularization parameters on both Probability of False Alarm (PFA) and Probability Detection (PD) values. Application on real data and performance comparison with standard migration processes showed the interest of the approach in particular to detect buried pipes having very weak responses. Salucci et al. in [10] performed quantitative imaging of the dielectric characteristics of unknown targets buried in a lossy halfspace by suitably processing wide-band ground penetrating radar (GPR) measurements. They propose an innovative multi-frequency (MF) fully non-linear inverse scattering (IS) technique exploiting the integration of a conjugate-gradient (CG) solver within the iterative multi-scaling approach (IMSA). A set of representative synthetic experiments has been presented and discussed to assess the effectiveness of the introduced methodology as well as to compare it to a state-of-the-art FH-based technique. They conclude that the FH technique is more reliable and accurate than the MF one in several situations such as different shapes, dimensions, and contrasts of the unknown targets, while on the other hand, the MF strategy is faster thanks to the execution of a single multiresolution minimization. 2.6. Interferometric imaging approach Liu in [11] reports the application of an interferometric imaging approach to cross-hole multi-offset transmission (CHMOT) borehole radar data to generate a virtual single-hole, multi-offset reﬂection (SHMOR) proﬁle with the validation of a real SHMOR data set. The results of the present study expanded the validation to the SHMOR case implemented in previous work. The potential of the Wave Interferometric Virtual Source (WIVS) approach for improving the resolution of bedrock fracture imaging for some needed applications was demonstrated. It will provide more useful information when it applies to situations where multiple borehole transmission surveys are routinely conducted, such as in the ﬁelds of mining industry and geothermal explorations for imaging water transport or other ﬂuid bearing fractures in the target formations. 2.7. Performance assessment of GPR test methods Benedetto and Tosti in [12] propose a GPR signal processing methodology, calibrated and validated on the basis of a consistent amount of data collected by means of laboratory-scale tests, to assess the performance of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standards for GPR systems. This paper is the ﬁrst study that focuses on the ASTM SNR test, thereby aiming at providing a detailed analysis of the bias and variance of the testing variable under consideration (i.e. the SNR). The study is performed with several GPR systems (i.e. exploiting antennas tuned to several frequencies), analyzing the speciﬁc relationship between the frequency of investigation and the optimal thresholds for the ASTM test methods.  3  Acknowledgment We would like to thank Prof. B. Ottersten for providing the opportunity to organize this special issue and the Elsevier staff for their support. Special thanks also to the Chair and Editorial Coordinator of COST Action TU1208 for their great support towards this initiative. We are also very grateful to all the reviewers who have provided timely and constructive reviews and contributed to the high quality of this issue. Finally, we would like to thank all the authors who have contributed to this special issue, by sharing their latest research results.  References [1] A. Benedetto, F. Tosti, L. Bianchini Ciampoli, F. D’Amico, An overview of ground-penetrating radar signal processing techniques for road inspections, Signal Process. (2016) (This issue). [2] E. Forte, M. Pipan, Review of multi-offset GPR applications: data acquisition, processing and analysis, Signal Process. (2016) (This issue). [3] C. Warren, A. Giannopoulos, Characterisation of a ground penetrating radar antenna in lossless homogeneous and lossy heterogeneous environments, Signal Process. (2016) (This issue). [4] X. Wang, S. Liu, Noise suppressing and direct wave arrivals removal in GPR data based on Shearlet transform, Signal Process. (2016) (This issue). [5] A. Tzanis, A versatile tuneable curvelet-like directional ﬁlter, with application to fracture detection in two-dimensional GPR data, Signal Process. (2016) (This issue). [6] S. Zhao, I.L. Al-Qadi, Development of regularization methods on simulated ground-penetrating radar signals to predict thin asphalt overlay thickness, Signal Process. (2016) (This issue). [7] M. Sun, C. Le Bastard, N. Pinel, Y. Wang, J. Li, J. Pan, Z. Yu, Estimation of time delay and interface roughness by GPR using modiﬁed MUSIC, Signal Process. (2016) (This issue). [8] X. Feng, E. Nilot, C. Liu, Application of Freeman decomposition to full polarimetric GPR for improving subsurface target classiﬁcation, Signal Process. (2016) (This issue). [9] Q. Hoarau, G. Ginolhac, A.M. Atto, J.M. Nicolas, Robust adaptive detection of buried pipes using GPR, Signal Process. (2016) (This issue). [10] M. Salucci, L. Poli, A. Massa, Advanced multi-frequency GPR data processing for non-linear deterministic imaging, Signal Process. (2016) (This issue). [11] L. Liu, Virtual multi-offset reﬂection proﬁling with interferometric imaging for borehole radar, Signal Process. (2016) (This issue). [12] F. Benedetto, F. Tosti, A signal processing methodology for assessing the performance of ASTM standard test methods for GPR systems, Signal Process. (2016) (This issue).  Nikos Economou 1 Applied Geophysics Lab School of Mineral Resources Engineering Technical University of Crete Polytechnioupolis, Kounoupidiana, Chania, Crete, Greece E-mail address: neconom@mred.tuc.gr Francesco Benedetto 2 SP4TE – Signal Pro cessing for Telecommunications and Economics Laboratory, University of ROMA TRE, Via Vito Volterra 62, 00146 Rome, Italy E-mail address: francesco.benedetto@uniroma3.it Maksim Bano 3 Institut de Physique du Globe de Strasbourg Ecole et Observatoire des Sciences de la Terre University of Strasbourg, 5 rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France E-mail address: maksim.bano@unistra.fr  1  http://www.mred.tuc.gr/ﬁleadmin/users_data/mred/cv_staff/economou_uk.  2  http://host.uniroma3.it/laboratori/sp4te/staff/benedetto.html. http://eost.unistra.fr/recherche/ipgs/ge/ge-perso/maksim-bano/.  pdf. 3  Editorial / Signal Processing ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎  4  Andreas Tzanis 4 Department of Geophysics, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens Panepistimiopoli, Zografou 15784, Greece E-mail address: atzanis@geol.uoa.gr 5  Jonathan Nyquist Weeks Chair of Environmental Geology Department of Earth & Environmental Science Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA E-mail address: nyq@temple.edu  4 5  http://users.uoa.gr/  atzanis. http://sites.temple.edu/geophysics.  Karl-Josef Sandmeier 6 Geophysical Research Zipser, Strasse 1, 76227 Karlsruhe, Germany E-mail address: info@sandmeier-geo.de Nigel Cassidy 7 Applied and Environmental Geophysics Group School of Physical and Geographical Sciences Keele University Staffordshire, UK E-mail address: n.j.cassidy@keele.ac.uk  6 7  http://www.sandmeier-geo.de. http://www.keele.ac.uk/gge/people/nigelcassidy.  