Fernandes
Assessment of the density and moisture content of asphalt mixtures of road pavements
2017
Construction and Building Materials

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Construction and Building Materials journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/conbuildmat  Assessment of the density and moisture content of asphalt mixtures of road pavements Francisco M. Fernandes a,⇑, Andreia Fernandes b, Jorge Pais b a b  University Lusíada, Faculty of Engineering and Technologies, Largo Tinoco de Sousa, 4760-108 Vila Nova de Famalicão, Portugal University of Minho, School of Engineering, Campus de Azurém, 4800-058 Guimarães, Portugal  h i g h l i g h t s  GPR surveys in HMA pavements carried out with a HF antenna to estimate density and moisture content.  The density of the asphalt mixes can be well predicted by the Complex Refractive Index Model.  Water is not easy to assess due to the connectivity pattern of air-voids inside the asphalt mixes.  a r t i c l e  i n f o  Article history: Received 22 November 2016 Received in revised form 21 May 2017 Accepted 19 June 2017 Available online xxxx Keywords: GPR Asphalt mixes Density Moisture  a b s t r a c t Distresses on asphalt pavements are associated to the traffic and moisture both in asphalt and granular layers. The traffic on road pavements is responsible by the occurrence of cracks that promote the pavement failure. The quality of the asphalt mixes, measured by its density, is an important factor to ensure the integrity of the pavements. The water in pavement surface decreases the driving comfort and reduces the asphalt-aggregate bond leading to the degradation of the asphalt materials. Thus, this paper uses Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) tests to assess density and moisture content on asphalt mix slabs. Six asphalt mixes were produced in laboratory with the same aggregate gradation and asphalt type, varying the binder content (4.0, 5.0 and 6.0%) and the air-void content (from 3.7% up to 16.9%). For the assessment of the moisture content, each mix was tested with 5, 10, 20 and 40% of the air-void volume filled with water. The effect of the water on GPR results was performed after the sprinkling of the water and 24 h after the water application. Results show that the density of the asphalt mixes can be well predicted by the Complex Refractive Index Model while the presence of water is not easy to identify due to the connectivity of the air-voids inside the asphalt mixes. Ó 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  1. Introduction Road pavements are affected by a large range of problems and distresses that occur due to the traffic of heavy loaded trucks, materials weathering, cracking and structural degradation, deficient structural performance and low construction quality, moisture, among other problems [14]. Due to the fact that the occurrence of such distresses in the road network can potentially put at risk the safety of persons and vehicles and due to the high importance of this sector for the economy of all countries, its regular and effective maintenance is of crucial importance. Road pavements are composed by asphalt layers on top of granular layers with the objective of reduce the stresses and strains in ⇑ Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: francisco.fernandes@fam.ulusiada.pt (F.M. Fernandes), jpais@ civil.uminho.pt (J. Pais).  the pavement foundation that presents reduced bearing capacity and contributes to the pavement deformation and consequently to the pavement cracking. All pavement layers have an important contribution for the pavement strength, but the main contribution is provided by asphalt layers, due to its stiffness, combined with its thickness [4]. This stiffness allows the bending of the asphalt layers while the granular layers only support vertical forces. The main contribution of asphalt mixes for the bearing capacity of asphalt pavements results from the density of the material [16]. This density is a combination of the amount of aggregates, asphalt binder and air-voids in the asphalt mix. The air-voids in the asphalt mixes allow the water entrance through the asphalt layers [13]. If the water reach the granular layers, it reduces the bearing capacity of these layers and consequently of all pavement [23]. The water in asphalt mixes is also responsible by the moisture damage occurring at either the asphalt-aggregate interface (adhesive failure) or within the asphalt (cohesive failure), depending on  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.06.119 0950-0618/Ó 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  Please cite this article in press as: F.M. Fernandes et al., Assessment of the density and moisture content of asphalt mixtures of road pavements, Constr. Build. Mater. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.06.119  2  F.M. Fernandes et al. / Construction and Building Materials xxx (2017) xxx–xxx  the thickness of the asphalt layer [11]. This moisture is resulted from either the entrance of water or moisture from the environment. Since water penetrates in the asphalt mixes, it deteriorates the bound between the asphalt and the aggregates, reducing the cohesive strength of the asphalt mastic, weakening the pavement. Water is also responsible by the strip of the asphalt-aggregate interface, producing the failure of the asphalt mix. Thus, assessment of density and moisture in asphalt mixes is of primordial importance for pavement analysis, design and quality control, providing also an important tool for pavement maintenance, rehabilitation and reinforcement. It is a fact that the management of the road network is an overwhelming task because it generally consists of a very large number of infrastructures and an even higher number of kilometers of road pavements, most of the time of different nature and age [25]. Nevertheless, there are today a number of technologies and field tests that allow obtaining frequent and reliable information to assess the state of conservation of road pavements, namely: the falling weight deflectometer, coring, Ground Penetrating Radar GPR) [10,18,20,2] as well as the roughness and sound level of the surface of the pavements. GPR tests in the survey of road infrastructure started in the 1970s when the Federal Highway Administration FHWA) tested the applicability of GPR in tunnel and bridge decks [19] and the first vehicle-mounted GPR for road was developed for FHWA in 1985 [15]. At the start of the application of GPR in roads, it was used on the measurement of pavement thickness [12], detection of voids under concrete pavements [21] and detection of deteriorated areas in bridge deck delamination [1]. GPR has been used also in the measurement of the depth to steel dowels, depth to bedrock, delamination in asphalt pavements, water is soils and granular layer and depth to water level. Of the various applications, GPR seems to be the most successful for pavement layer thickness measurements, whereas agencies report less satisfactory results with void detection and questionable results for asphalt stripping [15]. Presently, GPR is among the geophysical engineering a tool that provides information about the physical properties and characteristics of the components of the road which in turn can be related to highway distresses. In road pavements surveys, the major advantages of the use of GPR is related to the type of testing that produces a continuous profile at high speed with a significant accuracy. GPR is a technology that can provide meaningful subsurface information at traffic speed. Its disadvantages include the complexity of the GPR data that for some cases need a good software for its analysis. This paper focus on the use of GPR to assess the density of asphalt mixes used in road pavements and the effect of the presence of water in asphalt mixes. Moisture has been the subject of several studies, both within pavements [22] and in soils [17]. Furthermore, the correlation of the dielectric constant of the asphalt mixes with the moisture content and the density will be evaluated. The knowledge of such information could potentially indicate areas with percolation deficiencies or can help to identify areas where water content is present during long periods of time. The development of this study was carried out in laboratory by measuring the GPR signal response on small slabs of asphalt mixes with different compositions and subjected to different water contents. This work was only developed in laboratory to ensure the control of the material properties and testing conditions for what a ground-couple GPR was used. The testing program consisted in the measurement of the velocity of waves propagation from the radargrams obtained with GPR and the analysis of these results against the air-void and water content in the asphalt mixes.  2. Use of ground penetrating radar on road pavements GPR transmits and receives pulses of radio energy and the reflected signal from the interfaces of the pavement layers gives information about the thickness and dielectric properties of the pavement layers. When the radio energy emitted by the GPR encounters a layer with different electrical properties, some of the energy is reflected off the interface and the rest passes through. The analysis of the reflected energy is combined to produce a profile to be interpreted to obtain the dielectric properties of the materials and the thickness of the pavement layers. The dielectric constant is the most used GPR parameter to characterize the asphalt mixes because it can be correlated to the composition of the material in terms of aggregate, binder and air-void content. A model for this correlation is presented in Shangguan et al. [22]. Also, the moisture content of the layer changes the value of the dielectric constant as expressed by Plati and Loizos [17]. The dielectric constant, er, of a material relates the relative electromagnetic velocity in a material to the speed of light in free space, c (3.0  108 m/s), as indicated in Eq. (1), where v is the electromagnetic velocity in the material. The application of this equation requires suitable care because it is only valid for materials with a magnetic permeability of the free space.  r ¼   c 2  ð1Þ  v  For a road pavement composed by several layers, the dielectric constant of the pavement layers is obtained from the amplitudes of the reflected pulses (A0, A1 and A2) and the two-way travel time (t1 and t2) as represented in Fig. 1. The thickness, d, of a pavement layer can be calculated using Eq. (1) and considering that the velocity is given by the distance divided by the time, t, as indicated in Eq. (2).  ct d ¼ pﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 er  ð2Þ  The radar signal, in terms of amplitude and time, changes due to the various pavement conditions as indicated in Table 1 from SHRP [24] where an up arrow indicates an increase in that parameter and a down arrow a decrease. This table shows that all pavement and asphalt mix variables have influence in the return signal obtained with the GPR, allowing a complete characterization of all their variables. This table was useful in the interpretation of the field data collect in the SHRP program, mainly when data were collected in a visually undistressed pavement, the table was used to get a preliminary indication of changing pavement conditions  Fig. 1. Typical GPR signal for an asphalt pavement.  Please cite this article in press as: F.M. Fernandes et al., Assessment of the density and moisture content of asphalt mixtures of road pavements, Constr. Build. Mater. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.06.119  3  F.M. Fernandes et al. / Construction and Building Materials xxx (2017) xxx–xxx Table 1 Effects of changes in pavement maintenance condition on radar signal [24]. Maintenance Condition  Effect on Radar signal  Increase in base moisture Increase in subgrade moisture Increase in moisture below slab joint Moisture in surface layer a) Layer completely wet b) Large wet area Buried low-density stripped layer Air-voids or loss support Overlay delamination  A0  A1  A2  t1  t2  – – –  " – "  ; " ;  – – –  " – –  ; ;  " ;  ;  " ; – " Negative peak between A0 and A1 Distortion of peak A1 Multiple small peaks between A0 and A1  as the radar traveled along the highway. However, the use of this table should be made with special attention for the other variables that can influence the measurements.  For granular layers, the moisture content is determined through the Complex Refractive Index Model (CRIM), presented in Eq. (6),  2.1. Density of asphalt mixes  where: eb = dielectric constant of the base material; hs, hw, hv = volumetric concentrations of solid, water and air-voids, respectively; es, ew, ev = dielectric constants of the solids (typically 4–8), water (81) and air (1), respectively. Considering the dielectric constants of the water and air, Eq. (6) can therefore be simplified as expressed in Eq. (7).  For a composite material, as the asphalt mixes, its dielectric constant can be expressed as a function of the dielectric constants of the asphalt mix components and the respective volumes. The main model used to estimate the dielectric constant of a composite material is the Complex Refractive Index Model CRIM) that assumes the shape indicated in Eq. (3) [3] for the case of an asphalt mix,  ðeam Þa ¼ hag ðeag Þa þ hap ðeap Þa þ hv ðev Þa 1  1  1  1  ð3Þ  where: eam = dielectric constant of the asphalt mix; a = parameter dependent on the mix composition (usually assumed to be 2); hag, hap, hv = volumetric concentrations of aggregate, asphalt and airvoids, respectively; eag, eap, ev = dielectric constants of the aggregate (typically 4–8), asphalt (typically 2–4) and air (1), respectively. Considering the dielectric constants of the air and a = 2, Eq. (3) can therefore be simplified as expressed in Eq. (4).  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ  eam ¼ hag eag þ hap eap þ hv  ð4Þ  This equation has been used to calculate the density of the asphalt mixes by knowing the volumetric characteristics of the asphalt mixes, in terms of asphalt and air-void content, as function of the dielectric constant of the aggregates and asphalt. The derivation of Eq. (4) for asphalt mixes was made by Al-Qadi et al. [3], resulting the Eq. (5), where Gam is the specific gravity of the asphalt mix, Pap is the percentage of asphalt in the asphalt mix, Gap is the specific gravity of the asphalt, Gag is the specific gravity of the aggregate of the asphalt mix, Gmm is the maximum specific gravity of the asphalt mix.  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ  Gam ¼  Pap Gap  eam  1 ap Þ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 eap þ ð1P eag  Gmm Gag  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ  ð5Þ  Other models to predict the specific gravity has been developed by Shangguan et al. [22], Leng et al. [7–9]. However, the model expressed by Eq. (5) was used in this work. 2.2. Moisture in asphalt mixes GPR has been used to assess the moisture content mainly of granular layer and soils where the influence of the water has a huge effect in the behavior of these materials and consequently in the pavement system. However, recently the water and moisture in asphalt mixes has been indicated as a factor for pavement distresses mainly the asphalt mix desegregation that conducts to the completely failure of the pavement.  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ  pﬃﬃﬃﬃ  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ  eb ¼ hs es þ hw ew þ hv ev  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ  ð6Þ  pﬃﬃﬃﬃ  eb ¼ hs es þ 9hw þ ha  ð7Þ  The first derivation of this equation was made by Wang et al. [27] for the assessment of the moisture in soils, as indicated in Eq. (8), where Vw is the volume of water in the soil, Ws is the weight of solids in the soil and cs is the specific gravity of solids.  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ Vw ¼    eap  1  Wcss 8  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ  eag  1   ð8Þ  3. Testing program To verify if there is a possible correlation between the moisture content, the physical and constructive characteristics of asphalt mixes and the results obtained by GPR, a testing experiment was prepared. For that purpose, six asphalt mix slabs (0.75  0.50  0.075 m3) were produced with different characteristics, namely the percentage of asphalt and the air-void content. Maximum specific gravity and the asphalt mix specific gravity were different. These characteristics are presented in Table 2. The parameters for the design of the asphalt mixes were chosen to produce asphalt mixes representative to the one used in road pavements, mainly in terms of air-void content, where three slabs were compacted with low air-void content representing dense mixes and three slabs were compacted with high air-void content representing semi-open asphalt mixes. Open asphalt mixes are not important for moisture study because the water does not stay inside the mix. It only percolates through the mix until an impervious layer. Thus, open graded asphalt mixes were not considered in this work. The control of the physical properties of the asphalt mixes was made by measuring the maximum specific gravity of the asphalt mix for each asphalt content. This measurement was carried out with loose asphalt mix before compaction and due to the variability of this property, three replicates were used to obtain the average value that was rounded to the nearest ten. The asphalt content was controlled during the asphalt mix production ensuring a correct weight of the aggregates and the asphalt used in the asphalt mixes. The density of each slab was controlled by putting the correct weight of asphalt mix in the mold for compaction. The air-void  Please cite this article in press as: F.M. Fernandes et al., Assessment of the density and moisture content of asphalt mixtures of road pavements, Constr. Build. Mater. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.06.119  4  F.M. Fernandes et al. / Construction and Building Materials xxx (2017) xxx–xxx  Table 2 Characteristics of the asphalt mix slabs. Slab  Maximum specific gravity (kg/m3)  Asphalt content in weight (%)  Density (kg/m3)  Air-void content in volume (%)  1 2 3 4 5 6  2460 2500 2520 2460 2500 2530  6 5 4 6 5 4  2370 2370 2370 2100 2100 2100  3.7 5.0 6.0 14.6 15.9 16.9  content results from the comparison between the maximum specific gravity and the density of the asphalt mix. The slabs produced for this study were based on an AC14 asphalt mixture (14 mm maximum aggregate size) produced with a conventional asphalt binder (35/50 pen asphalt with 46 mm/10 penetration at 25 °C, 100 g, 5 s and 60 °C of softening point) with an optimum binder content of 5.0%. The mineral aggregates used in this work were obtained from a local quarry and are of granitic origin. The filler is from a limestone source. The aggregate gradation is presented in Fig. 2, as well as the limits proposed in the European standard. Fig. 3 shows the entire set of slabs used for this research and the GPR testing. It can be seen that the borders of the slabs were plastered with lime mortar in order to avoid a too fast drainage of the liquid from them. In each slab, three lines were drawn where the  three profiles were carried out with a ground-coupled high frequency antenna (central frequency of 1.6 GHz) from MALA Geosciences Inc. The sampling frequency was 23 GHz, the waveform was a short pulse with wide-band signal. Due to the fact that MALA data is registered as raw data, a DC shift filter was applied to properly align the signal along depth. Apart that, no additional filters were used. The measurements along these three lines were sought to take into account the variability of the water diffusion through the slab and to be able to obtain average results. These lines were draw at 0.125, 0.25 and 0.375 m from the longer edge of the slabs, in an attempt to avoid any interference from those interfaces. In order to better understand the effect of the water in the asphalt mixes, because it depends how the air-voids are connected, after GPR testing the slabs were cut in prismatic specimens as presented in Fig. 4, at left for slab 3 (asphalt mix with 6.0% air-void content) and at right for slab 6 (asphalt mix with 16.9% air-void content). The observation of the prismatic specimens allowed concluding that the air-voids of mix 3 are not connect with each other. The same conclusion was observed for mix 1 and 2. For asphalt mix 6 and consequently for 4 and 5, connections between the air-voids are visible. In order to identify the presence of moisture in the asphalt layers, water was successively sprinkled over the surface of the slabs, much in the same way rain does, using a spray gun. The amount of water used in each slab was calculated relatively to the slab porosity in order to represent 5, 10, 20 and 40 % of the air-voids volume.  100 90  aggregates  80  Upper limit  % passing  70  Lower limit  60 50 40 30 20 10 0 0.01  0.1  1  Sieve opening (mm)  10  100  Fig. 2. Aggregate gradation used for the asphalt mixes.  Fig. 3. View of the slabs and GPR testing.  Please cite this article in press as: F.M. Fernandes et al., Assessment of the density and moisture content of asphalt mixtures of road pavements, Constr. Build. Mater. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.06.119  F.M. Fernandes et al. / Construction and Building Materials xxx (2017) xxx–xxx  5  Fig. 4. View from the porosity distribution of the slabs (left: mix 3; right: mix 6).  Top Bottom  of the asphalt mixes. All tests were performed on the six slabs of asphalt mix produced in laboratory and presented in Fig. 3. For the assessment of the density, GPR measurements were performed on the slabs prior any sprinkling of water. For the assessment of the moisture, GPR measurements were performed after the sprinkling of the water and 24 h after. These tests were carried out for four different situations: after filling 5% of the air-voids with water, after filling 10% of the air-voids with water, after filling 20% of the air-voids with water and after filling 20% of the air-voids with water.  4. Results and discussion Fig. 5. Example of a single trace and picking of the slab thickness.  It must be stated that the sprinkling operation took additional time for higher amounts of water (from less than 30 s to over 2 min). In this case, the water was introduced directly over the slab, without spray gun. This caused the water to percolate into the slab during a little bit longer than when using lower amounts of water. After application of the water, GPR measurements were carried out and 24 h after the application of the water. The GPR measurements were carried out with a time window of 5 ns and a sampling frequency superior to 20 GHz. An example of a single trace is pictured in Fig. 5. The slabs were laid over a reinforced concrete floor. Due to the dimensions of the slab and the resolution of the 1.6 GHz antenna, the signals from the top and bottom surfaces are not totally separated. Consequently, the top and bottom surfaces of the slab were chosen as the top highest positive peaks of the trace. The choice of these peaks was taken based on the fact that the asphalt’s relative dielectric constant ranges from 2 dry) to 12 wet), which is most of the time similar to the values of the relative dielectric constant for dry concrete up to 10). In this way, the evolution of the relative dielectric constants was considered as following an increasing trend air to asphalt and asphalt to concrete slab), which resulted in a similar signal of the reflection coefficient, derived from the reflection coefficient equation from Daniels [5], hence a similar signal polarity. Additionally, this picking follows the hypothesis used in Al-Qadi et al. [3]. This was later confirmed with additional tests carried out with an aluminum sheet between the floor and the slab. The analysis in the frequency domain was restricted to the comparison of the dominant frequency in all dry and wet stages. This analysis revealed that this frequency was very similar in all cases, between 1130 and 1140 MHz (coefficient of variation of 2%). Thus, it seems unlikely the use of this single parameter to identify moisture presence. The testing program was divided into two parts. The first one was related to the assessment of the density of the asphalt mixes and the second part was related to the assessment of the moisture  4.1. Assessment of the density The first part of the testing program consisted into GPR measurement on the slabs without the presence of water. This procedure can identify the thickness of the slabs and the density of the material through the Complex Refractive Index Model and its derivation for asphalt mix constituents as expressed in Eq. (5), using the specific gravity of the aggregates and of the asphalt, respectively 2.65 and 1.02 g/cm3 [6] and the maximum specific gravity of the asphalt mix and the percentage of asphalt in the mix. The dielectric constants of the aggregates and asphalt were obtained by the application of the minimum squares method that equals the measured values of the specific gravity and the ones predict by the model. The comparison of predicted and model values presented below corresponds to the validation of the model. Before the analysis of the density, GPR results were analyzed in terms of the asphalt mix dielectric constant, with the results presented in Fig. 6, with the asphalt mix density expressed as function of the dielectric constant for the three asphalt content used in the asphalt mixes. In Fig. 7, the asphalt mix dielectric constant is expressed as function of the asphalt content and density of the asphalt mix. The dielectric constant of the asphalt mixes was obtained using the velocity of the signal in the asphalt mix and the speed of the light in free space through Eq. (1). As observed in Fig. 6, the dielectric constant of the asphalt mixes increases when the asphalt content increases because the increase of the asphalt content corresponds to a decrease of the air-void content in the asphalt mix. The effect of asphalt content on the dielectric constant of the asphalt mix can be described by a parabolic variation as observed in Fig. 7. Also, the increase of the asphalt mix density, that is a result of the increase of the solid component of the asphalt mix, conducts to an increase of the dielectric constant. The application of Eq. (5) to obtain the specific gravity of the asphalt mixes was made by searching, using the minimum squares method, the values of the dielectric constants of the aggregates and asphalt of the mixes that equals the measured values of the specific  Please cite this article in press as: F.M. Fernandes et al., Assessment of the density and moisture content of asphalt mixtures of road pavements, Constr. Build. Mater. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.06.119  6  F.M. Fernandes et al. / Construction and Building Materials xxx (2017) xxx–xxx  Fig. 6. Asphalt mixes density as function of the dielectric constant.  Fig. 7. Dielectric constant of the asphalt mixes function of the asphalt content.  gravity and the ones predict by the model. The validation of the model is expressed in Fig. 8 where it can be observed that the density of the asphalt mixes is well predicted by the dielectric constants obtained in the GPR tests. This results confirm the conclusions of Al-Qadi et al. [3] and Leng et al. [7–9]. 4.2. Assessment of the moisture content The effect of the water in the asphalt mixes was assessed by measuring the dielectric constant of the asphalt mixes immediately after the sprinkler of water on the surface of the slabs. The amount of water applied on the slabs’ surface was 5%, 10%, 20% and 40% of the air-void volume in the slabs. This volumes were calculated comparing the theoretical maximum density with the specific density of the asphalt mixes. The results from these experiments showed that the presence of moisture is perceptible in some parameters immediately after the sprinkler of water on the surface of the slabs, independently of theirs properties. The first analysis to study the effect of the water in the asphalt mixes was made by analyzing the evolution of the dielectric constant of the asphalt mixes as function of the air-void content in the slabs. This analysis was done for all water contents used in this study in addition to the slab tested without water (dry condition).  This analysis is presented in Fig. 9 where it can be observed a downward trend of the dielectric constant when the air-voids increase. This is valid for all four water content as well as for the dry condition. However, for each group of air-void content (low and high) it is observed that the dielectric constant has a nonconstant variation. For low air-void content, the dielectric constant increased from 3.7% to 5.0% and decreased to 6.0%, meaning that this level of air-void is so small that they are not completely connected avoiding the water entrance. Therefore, this closed pore system prevents water infiltration in a way that it can affect the dielectric value. For high air-void content, the trend of the dielectric constant with the air-void content is almost linear. Even 24 h after the sprinkling of the water (Fig. 10) it is evident the decrease of the dielectric constant of the asphalt mixes when air-void content increases. However, the trend observed for both low and high air-void contents is not constant. It is visible for example that the dielectric constant increase from 3.7% to 5.0% air-void content and decrease from 5.0% to 6.0%. Part of this fact is due to the drainage of the water from the bottom of the slabs, which can indicate that the GPR measurements were carried out with the air-voids partially filled with water. As identified in the previous analysis, GPR measurements for slab with 5.0% and 15.9% of air-voids content don’t follow the trend of the other slabs, meaning that the skeleton of the mineral aggre-  Please cite this article in press as: F.M. Fernandes et al., Assessment of the density and moisture content of asphalt mixtures of road pavements, Constr. Build. Mater. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.06.119  F.M. Fernandes et al. / Construction and Building Materials xxx (2017) xxx–xxx  7  Fig. 8. Comparison of observed and model of asphalt mixes density.  Fig. 9. Effect of the water in the asphalt mixes in the dielectric constant.  Fig. 10. Effect of the water in the asphalt mixes in the dielectric constant 24 h after sprinkling.  Please cite this article in press as: F.M. Fernandes et al., Assessment of the density and moisture content of asphalt mixtures of road pavements, Constr. Build. Mater. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.06.119  8  F.M. Fernandes et al. / Construction and Building Materials xxx (2017) xxx–xxx  gate are closed compared to the other asphalt mixes, blocking the entrance of the water into the asphalt mix. This fact is observed in Fig. 11 for the dielectric constant when 10% of the air-voids of the slabs were filled with water. These results evidence that the intermediate air-voids 5% and 15.9%) can be considered as outliers because the other 4 points follows a perfect straight line. However, to consider the inherent variation in the aggregate skeleton of asphalt mixes, it is important to consider this outliers, which can be studied by the normalized root mean square deviation NRMSD) index as proposed by Tosti et al. [26]. The effect is similar also for 20% and 40%. For the measurements just after the sprinkling of water, only the case of 5% does not have the expected trend. This happens for the lowest air-void content and is probably due to the reduced amount of water in an almost impervious material. One of the reason for some dispersion of the results in relation to the trend line is due to the closed porous system of the asphalt mixes where some water evaporates and did not penetrate into the slab, as thought, making later measurements useless to evaluate moisture contents. It was expected the dielectric constant to increase with water content. However, it was not possible to check where the water penetrated in the slab. Also, it was not possible to verify if the water percentage expected was present below the profiles carried out in the slabs (to overcome this uncertainty three measurements where always carried out along the slab). In this way, the results showed the water along the profile lines, and not necessarily the water expected to be measured. Although in some cases the trend is correct (the dielectric constant increases with water content), different or more tuned procedures will have to be applied to decrease the uncertainty in the measurements. The linear trend lines for the relationships between the dielectric permittivity and the air voids content can be predict by Eq. (9) where the A and B constants are indicated in Table 3.  eam ¼ A:hv þ B  ð9Þ  where: eam = dielectric constant of the asphalt mix; hv = air-void content of the asphalt mix; A, B = constants depending of the asphalt mix. Even for the GPR measurements 24 h after the water sprinkling, the presence of water allows a linear variation of the dielectric constant with the air-void content as observed in Fig. 12 for the case of 20% of water. However, a dispersion is observed for some air-void contents. The effect of the water in the asphalt mixes is presented in Fig. 13 where it is possible to observe a different behavior in the dielectric constant of the asphalt mixes. For slabs with low airvoid content (slab 1 through 3), the dielectric constant is almost constant or with a slight increase when the water content increase whereas it is observed a decrease of the dielectric constant for slabs with high air-voids (slabs 4 through 6). The effect of water in the dielectric constant can be observed for example in slab 2 where an increase of the dielectric constant is observed by the addition of water. This is evident with the addition of 5% of water. However, 10% of water does not lead to an increase of the dielectric constant. For the other water contents, it is visible an increase of the dielectric constant but, once again, a reduction is observed for the last water content (40%). The dispersion observed in the dielectric constant of the asphalt mixes by the addition of water is related to the aggregates structure in the asphalt mixes when the air-voids are not connected and the water has no possibility to penetrate through the asphalt mix or the air-voids are relatively connected and the water only penetrates to part of the asphalt mixes. This means that part of the air-voids are completely filled with water whereas the other part of the air-void doesn’t have water inside. The dispersion observed in the dielectric constant of the asphalt mixes by the addition of water is most probably related to the aggregates structure in the asphalt mixes, where a high percentage of the porosity is closed porosity, inhibiting the water to penetrate through the asphalt mix slab. This, on the one hand, prevents the expected increase expected of the relative dielectric constant. On  Fig. 11. Variation of the dielectric constant after the application of 10% of water.  Table 3 Constants for Eq. (9). Water content (% of air-voids)  After sprinkling After 24 h  A B A B  Dry  5%  10%  20%  40%  6.38E03 3.46E+00 6.38E03 3.46E+00  1.10E02 3.60E+00 6.45E03 3.50E+00  1.50E02 3.63E+00 1.68E02 3.57E+00  2.55E02 3.75E+00 1.60E02 3.60E+00  3.19E02 3.72E+00 1.57E02 3.55E+00  Please cite this article in press as: F.M. Fernandes et al., Assessment of the density and moisture content of asphalt mixtures of road pavements, Constr. Build. Mater. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.06.119  F.M. Fernandes et al. / Construction and Building Materials xxx (2017) xxx–xxx  9  Fig. 12. Variation of the dielectric constant 24 h after the application of 20% of water.  Fig. 13. Variation of the dielectric constant in asphalt mixes with the presence of water.  the other hand, although GPR readings were carried out along similar lines along the slab, it was not possible to estimate if the exact same path was followed. Additionally, the way and where the water penetrated into the slab was impossible to monitor. This further reinforces a certain uncertainty on the possibility of reading a part of the slab that has, indeed, a higher percentage of moisture inside. This uncertainty is patent in the overall erratic behavior in dielectric values of certain slabs (with higher void content), while in the others, the trend is as expected.  5. Conclusions Due to the difficulties in the assessment of the density of asphalt mixes placed in pavements and the identification of the presence of water in the asphalt mixes, which is an indicator either of the presence of cracks or the presence of intercommunicating air-voids, this work carried out a laboratory study to assess these two properties with the help of a GPR system. The laboratory study was conducted in six different asphalt mixes varying the density and the moisture in the asphalt mixes and GPR testing was performed on dry and wet conditions. For the analysis of the density of the asphalt mixes, the Complex Refractive Index Model was applied and it was concluded that the measured dielectric constant of the asphalt mixes can be used to predict the density of the asphalt mixes.  The analysis of the moisture of six asphalt mix slabs with different densities and air-void content showed that the GPR dielectric constant can, generally, indicate the presence of moisture, when comparing to a previous reference in dry state, especially if the readings are carried out moments after the application of the water. Highly porous materials indicate very marginal changes in the dielectric constant. However, higher density asphalt mixes seem to accumulate moisture on the surface, which affected its results. Due to the closed porous system of the asphalt mixes, several hours after the sprinkling, the water evaporates and did not entirely penetrate into the slab, as thought, making later measurements useless to evaluate moisture contents. Finally, correlation between the moisture content and the parameters that are used to characterize the asphalt mixes were not found, which can indicate that the moisture required other complex variables for its assessment. Acknowledgment This work is a contribution to COST (European COoperation on Science and Technology) Action TU1208 ‘‘Civil Engineering Applications of Ground Penetrating Radar.” The second author would like to express the support of Portuguese national funding agency for science, research and technology (FCT) through scholarship SFRH/BSAB/114415/2016.  Please cite this article in press as: F.M. Fernandes et al., Assessment of the density and moisture content of asphalt mixtures of road pavements, Constr. Build. Mater. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.06.119  10  F.M. Fernandes et al. / Construction and Building Materials xxx (2017) xxx–xxx  References [1] T. Alongi, G.G. Clemena, P.D. Cady, Condition Evaluation of Concrete Bridges relative to Reinforcement Corrosion, vol. 3, SHRP Report SHRP-S/FR-92-105, Washington, DC, 1992. [2] I.L. Al-Qadi, S. Lahouar, Measuring layer thickness with GPR – theory to practice, Constr. Build. Mater. 19 (10) (2005) 763–772. [3] I.L. Al-Qadi, Z. Leng, S. Lahouar, J. Baek, In-place hot-mix asphalt density estimation using ground-penetrating radar, Transp. Res. Rec. 2152 (2010) 19– 27. [4] S.I.R. Amorim, J.C. Pais, A.C. Vale, M.J.C. Minhoto, A model for equivalent axle load factors, Int. J. Pavement Eng. 16 (01) (2015) 881–893. [5] D.J. Daniels, Ground Penetrating Radar ISBN 0-86341-360-9, 726, Radar, Sonar, Navigation and Avionics Series 15, second ed., IEE, London, UK, 2004. [6] L. Fontes, G. Trichês, J.C. Pais, P.A.A. Pereira, Evaluating permanent deformation in asphalt rubber mixtures, Constr. Build. Mater. 24 (2010) 1193–1200. [7] Z. Leng, Prediction of in-situ asphalt mixture density using ground penetrating radar: theoretical development and field verification Doctoral Dissertation, ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, 2011. [8] Z. Leng, I.L. Al-Qadi, S. Lahouar, Development and validation for in situ asphalt mixture density prediction models, NDT and E Int. 44 (4) (2011) 369–375. [9] Z. Leng et al., Field application of ground-penetrating radar for measurement of asphalt mixture density-case study of Illinois route 72 overlay, Transp. Res. Rec. 2304 (2012) 133–141. [10] A. Loizos, C. Plati, Accuracy of pavement thicknesses estimation using different ground penetrating radar analysis approaches, NDT and E Int. 40 (2) (2007) 147–157. [11] R. Lytton, E. Masad, C. Zollinger, R. Bulut, D. Little, Measurements of surface energy and its relationship to moisture damage, Texas Transportation Institute, Report 0-4524-2, The Texas A&M University System, College Station, Texas, USA. [12] K.R. Maser, Highway speed radar for pavement thickness evaluation, in: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Ground Penetrating Radar, June 12–16, 1994, Kitchener, Ontario, Canada, 1994, pp. 423–432. [13] M.J.C. Minhoto, J.C. Pais, P.A.A. Pereira, The temperature effect on the reflective cracking of asphalt overlays, Road Mater. Pavement Des. 9 (4) (2008) 615–632. [14] M.J.C. Minhoto, J.C. Pais, P.A.A. Pereira, L.G. Picado-Santos, The influence of temperature variation in the prediction of the pavement overlay life, Road Mater. Pavement Des. 6 (3) (2005) 365–384.  [15] R. Morey, Ground penetrating radar for evaluating subsurface conditions for transportation facilities, Synthesis of Highway Practice 255, National Cooperative Highway Research Program, Transportation Research Board, National Academy Press, 1998. [16] J.C. Pais, S.I.R. Amorim, M.J.C. Minhoto, Impact of traffic overloads on road pavements performance, ASCE J. Transp. Eng. 139 (9) (2013) 873–879. [17] C. Plati, A. Loizos, Estimation of in-situ density and moisture content in HMA pavements based on GPR trace reflection amplitude using different frequencies, J. Appl. Geophys. 97 (2013) 3–10. [18] T. Saarenketo, T. Scullion, Road evaluation with ground penetrating radar, J. Appl. Geophys. 43 (2000) 119–138. [19] T. Saarenketo, Electrical Properties of Road Materials and Subgrade Soils and the Use of Ground Penetrating Radar in Traffic Infrastructure Surveys (Ph.D thesis), Faculty of Science, Department of Geosciences, University of Oulu. Acta Universitatis Ouluensis, A 471, 2006, p. 121. [20] T. Saarenketo, G. Scullion, Road evaluation with ground penetrating radar, J. Appl. Geophys. 3 (2–4) (2000) 119–138. [21] T. Scullion, C.L. Lau, Y. Chen, Pavement evaluations using ground penetrating radar, in: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Ground Penetrating Radar, June 12–16, 1994, Kitchener, ON, Canada, 1994, pp. 449– 463. [22] P. Shangguan, I. Al-Qadi, A. Coenen, S. Zhao, Algorithm development for the application of ground-penetrating radar on asphalt pavement compaction monitoring, Int. J. Pavement Eng. 17 (3) (2016) 189–200. [23] J.B. Sousa, J.C. Pais, G.B. Way, A mechanistic-empirical based overlay design method for reflective cracking, Road Mater. Pavement Des. 6 (3) (2005) 339– 363. [24] SHRP, Development of a ground-penetrating radar equipment for detecting pavement condition for preventive maintenance, National Research Council. Washington, DC. USA, 1993. Strategic Highways Research Program. [25] J.B. Sousa, J.C. Pais, R. Saim, G.B. Way, R.N. Stubstad, Mechanistic-empirical overlay design method for reflective cracking, Transp. Res. Rec. J. Transp. Res. Board 2002 (1809) 209–217. [26] F. Tosti, A. Benedetto, L. Bianchini Ciampoli, S. Lambot, C. Patriarca, E. Slob, GPR analysis of clayey soil behaviour in unsaturated conditions for pavement engineering and geoscience applications, Near Surf. Geophys. 14 (2016) 127– 144. [27] Fuming Wang, Robert L. Lytton, System Identification Method for Backcalculating Pavement Layer Properties, 72nd Transportation Research Board Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C., January, 1993.  Please cite this article in press as: F.M. Fernandes et al., Assessment of the density and moisture content of asphalt mixtures of road pavements, Constr. Build. Mater. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.06.119  