Forte
A new fast methodology to estimate the density of frozen materials by means of common offset GPR data
2013
Journal of Applied Geophysics 99 (2013) 135–145  

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Journal of Applied Geophysics journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jappgeo  A new fast methodology to estimate the density of frozen materials by means of common offset GPR data E. Forte a,⁎, M. Dossi a, R.R. Colucci a,b, M. Pipan a a b  Department of Mathematics and Geosciences (DMG), University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy National Research Council (CNR), Institute of Marine Sciences (ISMAR), Trieste, Italy  a r t i c l e  i n f o  Article history: Received 29 November 2012 Accepted 12 August 2013 Available online 5 September 2013 Keywords: GPR Amplitude analysis Ice stratigraphy Density variations Water equivalent  a b s t r a c t We propose a methodology to estimate the density of frozen media (snow, ﬁrn and ice) using common offset (CO) GPR data. The technique is based on reﬂection amplitude analysis to calculate the series of reﬂection coefﬁcients used to estimate the dielectric permittivity of each layer. We determine the vertical density variations for all the GPR traces by applying an empirical equation. We are thus able to infer the nature of frozen materials, from fresh snow to ﬁrn and ice. The proposed technique is critically evaluated and validated on synthetic data and further tested on real data of the Glacier of Mt. Canin (South-Eastern Alps). Despite the simplifying hypotheses and the necessary approximations, the average values of density for different levels are calculated with acceptable accuracy. The resulting large-scale density data are fundamental to estimate the water equivalent (WE), which is an essential parameter to determine the actual water mass within a certain frozen volume. Moreover, this analysis can help to ﬁnd and locate debris or moraines embedded within the ice bodies. © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.  1. Introduction and motivations The use of electromagnetic techniques to measure snow and ice properties is well established, with time domain reﬂectometry (TDR), (Stacheder et al., 2005; Stein and Kane, 1983) and ground-penetrating radar (GPR) techniques (Annan et al., 1994; Arcone, 1996; Arcone et al., 2005; Godio, 2009; Lundberg et al., 2006) applied at different scales. In particular, GPR surveys aim at several objectives, such as measuring snow/ice thickness, determining their density, and imaging the ice stratigraphy. In particular, accurate density estimations over large areas are important as an input parameter to hydrological models for the prediction of snowmelt runoff and avalanches, for the management of water reservoirs and for reliable evaluation of future changes both in thickness and areal extension of glaciers and polar ice caps. For most glaciological studies, instead of the densities, the water equivalent (WE) is often used. For a given area, the WE represents the thickness of the water layer that would theoretically result by melting the entire frozen materials within such area. In recent years, several researches aimed at improving the relations between snowpack density or wetness and EM parameters (Bradford and Harper, 2006; Bradford et al., 2009b; Godio, 2009; Granlund et al., 2009; Harper and Bradford, 2003; Lundberg et al., 2006; Previati et al., 2011) and many others focused on estimating the liquid water content or the porosity of the polar ice sheet or high latitude glaciers (Bradford and Harper, 2005; Bradford et al., 2009a; Brown et al., 2012), but there are no detailed studies  ⁎ Corresponding author: Via Weiss, 1 - 34128 Trieste, Italy. E-mail address: eforte@units.it (E. Forte). 0926-9851/$ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jappgeo.2013.08.013  dedicated to the accurate assessment of vertical and lateral density variations for Alpine type glaciers. Alpine glaciers are mainly deﬁned as temperate or maritime glaciers, in which the ice is everywhere at the melting pressure point except for a surface layer, a few meters thick, subjected to seasonal temperature cycles. Both winter snowfall and summer melt rates are high so that the winter cold wave is completely eliminated during the following summer. The thick snow cover insulates the underlying ice from low winter air temperatures, latent heat release associated with refreezing of meltwater effectively raises snow temperatures in the accumulation zone and chilled near-surface ice in the ablation zone is effectively removed by ablation as the melt season progresses (Benn and Evans, 2010). Only few glaciers at high elevations in the Alps can be deﬁned as polythermal glaciers in type, which are composed of both cold and warm ice. One of the main characteristics of such glaciers is the great density gradient of the ice body with depth. In a temperate glacier, it is actually possible to ﬁnd the limit of ﬁrn/ice conditions (density 830 g/cm3) at a depth of about 10 m. This means, in terms of time, that snow needs a period of only 3–5 years to become ice (Paterson, 1994). Temperate glaciers thus tend to occur in temperate maritime areas with high precipitation and summer melting, such as the Alps, the western coastal ranges of North America, western Norway, southern Iceland, New Zealand and Chilean Patagonia (Benn and Evans, 2010). For such reasons it is very important to evaluate the densities of the different frozen materials and therefore the total mass of water constituting the glacier: such data are in fact pivotal in any mass balance and forecasts about the future evolution and survival of the glacier. The mass balance is deﬁned as the change in mass of all or part of a glacier over a certain time period, generally one year (Benn and Evans,  136  E. Forte et al. / Journal of Applied Geophysics 99 (2013) 135–145  2010). It refers in particular to the algebraic sum of accumulation and ablation, which in the winter accumulation type glaciers, as the case of maritime/temperate glaciers in the Alps, is the result of the winter season balance and the summer season balance. In fact, accumulation occurs mainly during winter (October–May), when most precipitation falls as snow and ablation is at a minimum (positive balance), while during summer (June–September) the melting phase predominates and the glacier reaches its minimum at the end of the seasonal cycle, just before the ﬁrst snowfalls of the following winter (negative balance). In order to measure the mass evolution of glaciers, glaciological surveys, based on ﬁeld measurements are commonly used, replaced or supported in recent years by geodetic methods (air photographs, differential GPS surveys, satellite data, airborne or terrestrial surface surveys), laser altimetry, lidar, gravimetry and hydrological methods. Glacier mass balance is expressed in kg·m−2, usually replaced by the millimeter water equivalent (mm WE) or more formally in meter WE (m WE), (VV. AA., 2011). For this reason density measurements are fundamental to quantify in the best way the water equivalent (WE) of the entire ice body detected. It is very common to assume that the bulk density of a glacier is 900 kg m−3 that reduced density in a rough-andready allowance for the presence of snow and ﬁrn, large voids (crevasses, moulins and subglacial cavities) and sediment. Where a large proportion of the glacier thickness consists of snow and ﬁrn, like in small/thin glacier, a bulk density even well-lower than 900 kg m−3 is often found (VV. AA., 2011) with consequent large overestimation of the WE. A glacier with a stationary (i.e. time-invariant) accumulation rate and no melting, according to Sorge's law (Eq. 1), will have a stationary proﬁle of density as a function of depth beneath the surface; by extension, the density proﬁle also remains unchanged when the rates of melting near the surface and refreezing at depth are constant and equal in magnitude. −Cz  ρz ¼ ρi −ðρi −ρS Þe  ð1Þ  where: ρz = density at depth z, ρi = ice density, ρs = surface snow density, and Cz = 0.016–0.31 m−1. The case of temperate glacier is different and affected by several stages of melting and refreezing along the year. Quantiﬁcation of winter snow density is thus needed to evaluate the mass evolution of the glacier. As is often assumed that snow depth varies greatly because of wind effects, while snow density is spatially relatively stable, a large number of depth probings but only one, or a few, density measurements are usually performed. The data therefore need interpolation between sparse sampling points, which can introduce large errors in the bulk density estimations. The density is usually measured through weighing snow samples of known volume through the whole snow pack, from the glacier surface down to the previous year's summer level. Samples can either be taken from a pit or from a core. Direct density measurements are therefore often restricted to the upper few meters of the snowpack due to the existence of ice layers also at very shallow depths (Lundberg et al., 2006). Moreover, several glaciers within the temperate zones (like the Alpine glaciers) are actually in a dramatic regressive period and therefore there are debris levels and dense shallow ice, which prevent the execution or the deepening of the snow pits. Based on such motivations, we propose to estimate the density of a glacier using common-offset (CO) GPR data, which represent the usual GPR acquisition geometry and the faster one, both in terms of acquisition procedures and processing effort required. 2. Methods In the last decades, several studies focused on the estimation of properties of the frozen materials using GPR data. The most important physical properties involved in such researches are the electrical conductivity and permittivity. A planar wave can be considered a good approximation of real EM waves in many practical applications and a more complex wave can be  considered as a superimposition of planar waves. In particular, away from the immediate vicinity of the transmitting antenna, radar waves in the subsurface can be well approximated by a planar wave. The general form of a monochromatic planar wave propagating in the x direction is: A ¼ A0 expð−αxÞ expiωðt−βx=ωÞ  ð2Þ  where A is the amplitude of the wave, t the traveltime, x the distance, β the phase coefﬁcient, A0 the amplitude in the position x0 at the time t0, α the attenuation coefﬁcient, ω is equal to 2πf and represents the angular frequency, while i is the imaginary unit. In general α and β are dispersive, since they change with frequency. For electromagnetic plane waves in a ! ! lossy medium, the electric ﬁeld E and the magnetic ﬁeld H are described ! ! ! ! by the following equations: E ¼ E 0 expiðωt−kxÞ and H ¼ H 0 expi ðωt−kxÞ where k is the propagation constant having a complex form k = β − iα; αand β represent the attenuation and the phase velocity coefﬁcients, respectively and can be calculated by the following equations: rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ με pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 þ tan2 δ−1 2  ð3Þ  rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ  με pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 þ tan2 δ þ 1 2  ð4Þ  α¼ω and β¼ω  where ε and μ are the dielectric permittivity and magnetic permeability ! ! ! ! respectively deﬁned by the relations D ¼ εx E and B ¼ μx H , known ! as constitutive electromagnetic relations ( D is the electric displacement ! ﬁeld and B the magnetic ﬂux density). ε and μ are scalars only if the medium considered is homogeneous and isotropic, otherwise are tensors. tan δ of Eqs. (3) and (4) is the loss tangent which is frequency dependent and is related with conductivity σ and dielectric permittivity ε by the equation tanδ ¼  σ ωε  ð5Þ  Both conductivity σ and permittivity ε are, in general, complex and frequency dependent and can be written in the form: σ = σ′ − σ″ and ε = ε′ − ε″, respectively. Since we can deﬁne an effective conductivity σ e ′ as σ e ′ ¼ σ ′ þ ωε″ and an effective permittivity εe ′ as εe ′ ¼ ε′ −σ ″ =ω we can express the loss tangent for the general case with the following equation: tanδ ¼  σ ′ þ ωε″ : ωε′ þ σ ″  ð6Þ  From the physical point of view we can divide the electric losses considering tan δ as a sum of two terms: conductivity losses and dipolar losses as expresses in the following equation: ″  tanδ≅  σ DC e ðf Þ þ 2πf ε0 εr e′ ð f Þ  ð7Þ  where σDC = lim f → 0σ. For materials with low conductivity the ﬁrst term of Eq. (7) can be neglected and the equation reduces to tanδ ¼  ″  e ðf Þ : e′ ð f Þ  ð8Þ  With these approximations the Eqs. (3) and (4) can be expressed as: vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 0sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 u  ″ 2 u ′ ε uμε @ 1 þ ′ −1A α ¼ ωt 2 ε  ð9Þ  E. Forte et al. / Journal of Applied Geophysics 99 (2013) 135–145  and vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 0sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1ﬃ u  ″ 2 u ′ ε uμε @ β ¼ ωt þ 1A: 1þ ′ 2 ε  ð10Þ  We can rearrange Eq. (10) in order to provide the phase velocity v of a planar wave traveling in a medium: vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 0sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 1 u  ″ 2 u ′ ε uμ r ε e @ v ¼ ct 1þ ′ þ 1A: 2ε0 ε  ð11Þ  From this equation we observe that the phase velocity is slowed by an increase of the loss tangent as well as relative dielectric permittivity. In the case of GPR measurements, which commonly have a frequency bandwidth from about 10 MHz to about 1 GHz, ε″(f) is often small if compared with ε′(f). Moreover, many soils do not show dispersion of permittivity within this frequency range. If these conditions are realistic Eq. (11) reduces to: c v ¼ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ μ r εr  density/water equivalent (Brown et al., 2012; Godio, 2009; Granlund, 2009; Lundberg et al., 2006). Several empirical relations connecting the snow/ice bulk density with the EM velocity/electrical permittivity have been proposed. The equations suggested by Robin (1975) and Kovacs et al. (1995) can be applied if the mixing with other materials can be disregarded: 2  εice ¼ ð1 þ 0:845ρÞ  ð14Þ  where εice is the relative dielectric permittivity and the density ρ is in g/cm3. Other, more general models take into account that multi-phase systems with mixtures of ice, water and air usually occur in nature. Therefore, the dielectric permittivity of a mixture is the volume weighted average of permittivity of ice crystals, free water and air. Birchak et al. (1974) suggested the following relation, h i2 1=2 1=2 1=2 εmix ¼ εice ð1−ϕÞ þ εwater ϑ þ εair ðϕ−ϑÞ  ð15Þ  considering that the bulk density of the mixture can be computed according to the contribute of each component as, ρmix ¼ ½ρice ð1−ϕÞ þ ρwater ϑ  ð12Þ  where: μr is the relative magnetic permeability deﬁned as the ratio between the absolute magnetic permeability of the medium and the magnetic permeability of the free space and εr is the relative dielectric permittivity (or dielectric constant) deﬁned as the ratio between the absolute dielectric permittivity of the medium and the dielectric permittivity of free space. For non magnetic materials, which represent the most common situation for geological materials, μ has a value close to the value for the free space; so μr is almost equal to 1 and can be neglected. With these assumptions the phase velocity of a plane electromagnetic wave is simply a fraction of the velocity in free space, with a constant of proportionpﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ality of 1= εr ; that is: pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ v ¼ c= εr :  137  ð13Þ  Obviously, the phase velocity of a multi-frequency wave in a dispersive medium does not represent the speed with which the energy of the wave propagates through the medium. The latter is referred to as group velocity and can be calculated as the rate of change of radial frequency respect to the phase constant. In frozen materials, the electrical conductivity depends on the porosity (i.e. is inversely proportional to the bulk density), the free water content and the temperature. Several studies demonstrated that, for sub-freezing temperatures the electrical conductivity range is between 10−7 and 10−9 S/m and therefore the materials can be considered as dielectric. For temperatures closed to 0 °C, the conductivity increases reaching values of 10−5 S/m (Kopp, 1962). On the other hand, the effective conductivity shows a linear trend with an increasing liquid water content and becomes close to zero when the liquid water content is negligible (Granlund et al., 2009). The electrical permittivity is related to the polarizability of a material. The imaginary part of the permittivity for frozen materials depends on the free liquid water embedded within the material (Godio, 2009). From the electrical point of view a dry snow can be considered a lossless medium and therefore an EM wave traveling through it will have very small decay due to intrinsic attenuation. In such conditions the electrical permittivity is equal to the real part of the permittivity ε and the phase velocity can be estimated by simply applying the Eq. (13). Using the permittivity it is possible to estimate some very important glaciological parameters, among the others: the water content (Annan et al., 1994; Bradford and Harper, 2005; Bradford et al., 2009a and b) and the  ð16Þ  where ϕ is the bulk porosity and ϑ is the free water content. This is also known as the complex refractive index method (CRIM). When the effect of free water can be disregarded (i.e. if the ice temperature is considerably lower than 0 °C and the pressure small), the dielectric properties of a material with respect to the density can be estimated using the empirical equation proposed by Looyenga (1965): 1=3  εmix −1 ¼   ρmix  1=3 ε ice −1 a: ρice  ð17Þ  It's interesting to note that the general three phase system for real applications is not well constrained, since we must know either ϕ or ϑ to solve for the other, while it can be directly solved when considering a two phase system. Table 1 explains the relations between the density and the EM wave velocity from fresh snow (0.1 g/cm3) to ﬁrn (N0.4 g/cm3) and ice (N0.7 g/cm3), calculated using Robin's (Eq. 14) and Looyenga's (Eq. 17) equations. We considered the Eq. (13) to calculate the EM wave velocity from the estimated values of the electrical permittivity. We considered a reference density of 0.92 g/cm3 and an electrical permittivity of 3.2 for the pure ice in Eq. (17). We observe that the obtained values are similar for the two equations. Moreover, the velocity ranges from 17 cm/ns for 0.9 g/cm3 ice up to 27.7 cm/ns (or 27.9 cm/ns using the Looyenga's equation) for 0.1 g/cm3 fresh snow. This range is quite large if we include the end members,  Table 1 Relations between density, EM velocity and electrical permittivity for different frozen materials: from fresh snow to ice. Density [g/cm3]  Fresh snow  Firn  Ice  0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9  Robin (Eq. 14)  Looyenga (Eq. 17)  (εr)  Velocity [cm/ns]  (εr)  Velocity [cm/ns]  1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.3 2.5 2.8 3.1  27.7 25.7 23.9 22.4 21.1 19.9 18.9 17.9 17.0  1.2 1.4 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.5 2.8 3.1  27.9 25.7 24.2 22.7 21.3 20.0 18.9 17.9 17.0  138  E. Forte et al. / Journal of Applied Geophysics 99 (2013) 135–145  but becomes very limited considering only the transition from compact fresh snow (24.2 cm/ns) to low-density ice (18.9 cm/ns). The difference in this case is only of about 22%, which makes it difﬁcult to reliably estimate velocity using not only single-, but also multi-fold data where intrinsic errors of about ±5–10% are often reported (Bradford et al., 2009b; Pipan et al., 1999; Tillard and Dubois, 1995). Since the ﬁrst parameter derived from GPR data by standard techniques is the EM phase velocity, which can be easily converted into electric permittivity, in the following section we review some of the most common methods to estimate the electromagnetic wave velocity (and therefore the density) from GPR data acquired on frozen materials, illustrating the basic principles and underlying strengths and limitations for each case. In fact, the accuracy level obtained in this step has the strongest inﬂuence in the ﬁnal density estimation. 3. Critical review of EM velocity estimation techniques The term “velocity” related to GPR study usually refers to “the mean electromagnetic phase wave velocity within a medium”. When we analyze a “velocity” we can consider an “instantaneous phase velocity” vi ∂s deﬁned asvi ¼ lim . For practical GPR experiments, the instantaneous ∂t→0 ∂t velocity cannot be measured and we usually consider the “interval velocity” or the “Root Mean Square velocity”. Interval velocity represents simply the mean velocity of a speciﬁc subsurface layer (i.e. an interval). If the material considered is homogeneous and isotropic, the interval velocity is equal to the instantaneous velocity in any point within the layer. Real media often don't satisfy such assumptions and therefore interval velocity can be interpreted as a mean velocity related to an interval where physical properties are considered constant. Since normal geological media are usually neither homogeneous nor isotropic, in the general case, also considering a very small volume, the velocity assumes different values depending on the direction of propagation within the medium (Al-Dajani et al., 1999; Tsvankin, 1995). In particular velocity varies with azimuth showing an elliptic behavior similar to the reﬂection seismic case, with an ellipse axis corresponding to vmax and the other ellipse axis corresponding to vmin (Al-Dajani et al., 1999). So, the term “velocity” or “velocity ﬁeld” assumes a different complexity degree as a function of basic simpliﬁcations and approximations established before and during GPR data processing and analysis. The ordinary GPR data surveys are performed using common-offset antennas conﬁgurations. Using such data the only way to estimate the EM velocity is from the scattering (diffraction) events. The energy that GPR transmits into the soil is partly diffracted when objects having dimensions smaller than the mean wavelength of the electromagnetic wavelet used are reached (e.g. Grasmueck et al., 2005). The diffracted events in the radar section trace out a hyperbola. The shape of the hyperbola, in particular its relative width or roundness, is determined by the velocity of the radar wave in the medium under consideration, so measurement of its form can yield an estimate of velocity. The RMS velocity vRMS between the ground surface and an object can be determined in the case of a distance between transmitting and receiving antenna equal to zero (zero offset) from a GPR section by ﬁtting the following hyperbola to the measured arrival times at several positions x vRMS ¼  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 x2 þ h2 tx  ð18Þ  where x is the horizontal distance between the location of the antenna and the projection at the surface of the scattering object (apex of the hyperbola), h is the depth of the scattering object, and tx, is the arrival time of the diffracted wave at position x that has been zero time corrected. It is important to note that a diffraction hyperbola has a different curvature than a reﬂection hyperbola. In particular the diffraction hyperbola has a greater curvature.  If the GPR section is measured with a signiﬁcant antenna separation, i.e. offset a, this should also be included in the velocity determination as follows:  vRMS ¼  qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ðx−a=2Þ þ h2 þ ðx þ a=2Þ þ h2 tx  :  ð19Þ  There are two possible methods to estimate the EM velocity by using the diffraction hyperbolas: A) the hyperbola ﬁtting and B) the migration velocity analysis. 3.1. Fitting of diffraction hyperbolas This method uses Eq. (19) to interactively/automatically determine the hyperbola which best ﬁts the limbs of the diffraction event. The hyperbola ﬁtting method is very simple and can be applied to any hyperbolic event within a GPR section and was ﬁrst applied for glaciers by Moore et al. (1999). In situations where no reﬂections occur (e.g. in some urban environment), this is the only available method. The main disadvantages are related to the achievable accuracy since only few hyperbolas can usually be analyzed and they are irregularly distributed within the section. Moreover, if the scattering object has a dimension longer than the other, the shape of the diffraction is no longer a hyperbola and therefore the ﬁtting will produce wrong estimations. Further causes of error in the velocity estimations are due to the limited lateral extension of the diffractions recorded on CO GPR proﬁles and to the interference between diffractions and reﬂections. Fig. 1 shows the ﬁtting performed for a real hyperbola due to a scatterer within a glacier. This case is paradigmatic for several real situations: the uncertainties in the traveltime picking, combined with the limited lateral extension of the recognizable diffraction produce high velocity errors. For the data reported on Fig. 1, the best-ﬁt estimation is for a velocity of 19.4 cm/ns with an error of ±3.6 cm/ns, i.e. ± 18.6%. 3.2. Migration velocity analysis As described above, diffraction hyperbolas have different shape as a function of medium velocity of layer(s) above hyperbola apex. All migration algorithms are developed to collapse diffractions (and move dipping reﬂectors to their correct position) and depend strongly on how accurate the velocity ﬁeld is estimated. So, it is possible to exploit this velocity dependence to evaluate the velocity distribution. On common offset (i.e. single-fold) data the migration velocity analysis (MVA) can be performed using the following steps. The method considers several migrations applied to a GPR proﬁle using a series of constant velocities within a range ﬁxed by the analyst. The successive step is the manual or semi-automatic selection (picking) of the velocity for a given position (i.e. for a given time and horizontal location) that best collapses diffractions, thus obtaining several points where a velocity value is deﬁned Bradford and Harper (2005). From all such values, representing a RMS velocity from surface to the scattering object, it is possible to compute interval velocities using Dix inversion (Dix, 1955) or other more complex equations (e.g. Gretchka et al., 1997). Picking of best velocity can be automated by using different criteria such as maximum amplitude estimation or coherence measurements. The method can be named also “Migration Velocity Scan” because is somewhat similar to the well known Constant Velocity Stack (CVS) method used in seismic to evaluate stacking velocity (Montalbetti, 1971). Such procedure can obviously beneﬁt from the presence of several hyperbolas in the GPR section, while reﬂections are not visible or discontinuous: such situation is very common within some glaciers (Bradford and Harper, 2006), in urban environments and in archeological zones (Pipan et al., 1999). Further problems and pitfalls are related to interference between close hyperbolas or reverberation phenomena due to low  E. Forte et al. / Journal of Applied Geophysics 99 (2013) 135–145  139  Fig. 1. Example of diffraction hyperbola ﬁtting. The estimated velocity is 19.4 cm/ns with an error of ±3.6 cm/ns.  impedance objects. From the theoretical point of view, this method can integrate not only diffraction analysis, but also horizon coherence evaluation to estimate the velocity ﬁeld, but the latter criterion can hardly be exploited in real data. In any case, this method has a high level of subjectivity, as far as the choice of the best migration results is concerned, even if the S/N ratio is high and the diffraction hyperbolas can be clearly identiﬁed. Other, more accurate approaches can be applied to multi-fold datasets. Common-midpoint gather (CMP) analysis is often used to estimate radar velocity in glacier ice (e.g. Barrett et al., 2007; Blindow and Thyssen, 1986; Macheret et al., 1993). In the CMP method, data are acquired over a range of source–receiver offsets while maintaining a common midpoint. The root-mean-square (RMS) radar velocity above a given reﬂector is then estimated by ﬁtting the normal-moveout (NMO) equation to the travel-time vs offset curve, by using CVG or coherence measurements like semblance (Yilmaz, 2001). This technique, well developed for reﬂection seismic data, can be further applied both on full multi-fold GPR sections and on single CMP gathers. The latter is the most common approach, which implies to analyze just few single,  usually large offset range CMPs and to interpolate the velocity obtained at the different locations. In Fig. 2 we report an example of CMP gather from a glacier after amplitude recovery (A) and after the NMO correction for a constant 20 cm/ns velocity, which makes all the reﬂections almost horizontal (C). Nonetheless, a nearly constant velocity ﬁeld is physically impossible, since the GPR dataset images several reﬂections having also high amplitudes. Similar to the case of the diffraction hyperbola analysis, also in this case the resulting velocity is the RMS, which can be converted into interval velocity as described above. The main limitations of this method are: the small offset range often available; the non hyperbolic shape of the reﬂection due to violation of the small spread approximation (Yilmaz, 2001) and of the assumption of planar, ﬂat-lying reﬂectors (Murray et al., 2007). If the GPR survey is performed in full multi-fold mode either using more than one receiving antenna (e.g. Bradford et al., 2009b), or combining series of CMPs, Common Shot Gathers or series of common offset proﬁles acquired along the same path (e.g. Pipan et al., 1999; Tronicke et al., 2000) usually a more accurate velocity analysis can be achieved.  Fig. 2. Example of velocity analysis on a CMP acquired on a glacier. A) Direct hyperbola ﬁtting; B) Semblance analysis; C) CMP corrected for the NMO with a constant velocity value of 20 cm/ns. Please note that all the reﬂections are almost perfectly horizontal after the applied correction.  140  E. Forte et al. / Journal of Applied Geophysics 99 (2013) 135–145  The available techniques have been originally developed for reﬂection seismic data and include velocity spectral analysis (Tillard and Dubois, 1995), traveltime inversion (Harper and Bradford, 2003) and Common Image Gather (CIG) iterative analysis of pre stack depth migrated data (Bradford, 2006; Pipan et al., 2003). Such methods can be very effective, but are often strongly user-dependent since they require detailed traveltime picking which can be impractical for large and/or complex datasets. Moreover, they require intensive time-consuming processing and, last but not least, they need high-coverage multi-fold data, which are often difﬁcult to acquire on Alpine glaciers due to severe logistic constrains. For these reasons, we implemented a different approach, completely independent from the velocity estimation, but rather based on reﬂection amplitude analysis to calculate the series of reﬂection coefﬁcients used to estimate the dielectric permittivity (and so the density) of any layer of a glacier. 4. The new approach For plane and parallel reﬂectors, bounding homogeneous and isotropic layers, and an EM wave propagating trough the i-th layer and reaching vertically the i-th interface, the reﬂection and transmission coefﬁcients are respectively: Ri ¼  ηiþ1 −ηi ηiþ1 þ ηi  ð20AÞ  Ti ¼  2ηiþ1 ηiþ1 þ ηi  ð20BÞ  where the intrinsic electrical impedance pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ η for a non-conductive medium can be approximated as: ηi ≅ μ i =εi . For snow and ice, the relative magnetic permeability is 1 and therefore the reﬂection and transmission coefﬁcients can be calculated using respectively: pﬃﬃﬃﬃ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ε − εiþ1 Ri ¼ pﬃﬃﬃﬃi pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ εi þ εiþ1  ð21AÞ  pﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 ε T i ¼ pﬃﬃﬃﬃ piﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ : εi þ ε iþ1  ð21BÞ  From these equations we obtain:  εiþ1 ¼ ε i  1−Ri 1 þ Ri  2  ð22AÞ  and T i ¼ Ri þ 1:  ð22BÞ  Using Eq. (22A) we can calculate the value for the relative permittivity of a medium (εi + 1) by estimating the reﬂection coefﬁcient at the boundary with another material and the permittivity of that material (εi), both using common offset (i.e. single-fold) GPR data. Since the frozen materials can be considered lossless, virtually no signiﬁcant intrinsic attenuation is expected, while the only attenuating factors are: A) scattering, B) geometrical spreading, and C) partial reﬂections (considering the antenna–ground coupling as a constant). A) The effect of the diffractions can be removed by means of migrations. 2-D migration cannot take into account the out of section energy, but it can be considered an adequate approximation in most real cases. B) The geometrical spreading can be corrected using amplitude recovery. Due to the antenna directivity, a precise correction can be obtained only if the radiation pattern and its variations in the subsurface are known. Since this can be measured only using complex polarimetric/ multi-component experiments, the simple application of a spherical divergence correction can be considered a valid ﬁrst approximation  approach. C) The effect of partial reﬂections can be analytically removed starting from the uppermost reﬂector up to the basal one. In the case of thin layers, Eqs. (21A) and (21B) are no longer valid and thicknesses below 1/10 of the radar wavelength cannot be normally detected by GPR (Olhoeft, 1998). In any case, the exact limit of detectability also depends on the contrasts in electrical permittivity between all the layers crossed by the EM wave. The values calculated considering an average 20 cm/ns EM wave velocity (typical of ﬁrn) and a frequency equal to the nominal frequency of the transmitting antenna are reported in Table 2. We observe that both the optical resolution and the limit of detectability are always quite small for the commonly used antenna range if compared to the typical layer thicknesses observed in glaciers. A thin layer can lead to a considerable change in amplitude, when a direct wave is superimposed with one or several reﬂected waves bouncing in the thin layer before reaching the receiver. Depending on layer thickness to radar wavelength ratio and possible phase shifts at interfaces, this radar wave superposition may signiﬁcantly affect the amplitude at the point of measurement. In the present work, we are interested in bulk density values and not in thin layer effects (such as those related to ice lenses). We can therefore disregard the effect of thin layers on the reﬂected amplitude. The proposed inversion method aims at deriving the vertical electrical permittivity distribution for each GPR trace, by using CO data and by considering always the normal incidence case. Such approximation is quite reasonable also for real glacier data, if we consider the small values of the offset compared to the reﬂector depths (small spread approximation) and that planar parallel reﬂectors are a good approximation of the average layering conditions in glaciers. Our approach is somewhat similar to the TDR one (Mofﬁtt, 1964; Topp et al., 1980). In order to iteratively apply Eq. (22A) we need to determine the electrical permittivity of the shallowest layer with independent methods, such as: ground wave analysis on CMP, conversion of density values obtained by direct excavations by means of the empirical equations previously discussed, or dedicated trans-illumination experiments. From the theoretical point of view, the velocity of the uppermost level could be calculated by using the traveltime of the ground wave also on CO data. This approach simply implies that at constant and known offset, the direct wave traveltime allows straightforward calculation of EM wave velocity. Such calculus cannot be generally performed in the applications to ﬁeld data due to the small offsets normally used in CO data acquisition, which cause interference between air and ground wave and prevent the identiﬁcation of the latter one. Such effect is more apparent in frozen materials, which are characterized by higher EM wave velocities compared to other geological media. For instance, at 1 m offset and with a characteristic pure ice velocity of 16.8 cm/ns, the time separation between air and ground wave is no more than 2.6 ns. If we consider a 200 MHz antenna, the period is close to 5 ns, which prevents the discrimination of the two direct waves. We must know the amplitudes of the incident (Aii) and reﬂected (Ari) waves to determine the reﬂection coefﬁcient at the i-th interface, according to the equation: Ri ¼  Ar i : Aii  ð23Þ  Table 2 Relations between the wavelength, the optical resolution and the limit of detectability for different GPR antenna frequencies using an EM velocity of 0.2 m/ns. Nominal antenna frequency [MHz]  Wavelength [m]  Maximum optical vertical resolution (λ/4), [m]  Limit of detectability (λ/10), [m]  250 500 800  0.800 0.400 0.250  0.200 0.100 0.060  0.080 0.040 0.025  E. Forte et al. / Journal of Applied Geophysics 99 (2013) 135–145  We can then use Eq. (22A) to derive the electrical permittivity of the (i + 1)-th layer. The amplitudes of the incident and reﬂected waves at the i-th interface can be derived by using the amplitude of the wave reaching the ﬁrst interface (Ai1), which is equivalent to the one emitted by the transmitting antenna and by the amplitudes (Aci) recorded by the receiving antenna. We consider a lossless propagation between reﬂectors and we take into account the partial reﬂections due to each horizon. Considering the reﬂection of the i-th interface, the relations between the source wave amplitude (Ai1) and the i-th recorded amplitude (Aci) are the following: Ac1 ¼ Ai1 R1  ð24Þ  i−1  Aci ¼ Ai1 Ri ∏ T k ð2−T k Þ  ð25Þ  k¼1  with i ∈ N and i N 1. Eq. (25) takes into account the partial reﬂections through the transmission coefﬁcient at all the interfaces above the considered one, both in the downward and upward propagation. By knowing the amplitude of the wave reaching the ﬁrst interface Ai1 and the amplitudes recorded by the receiver Aci, we can derive the following relations: i−1  Aii ¼ Ai1 ∏ T k k¼1  and  Ar i ¼  Aci i−1  :  ð26Þ  ∏ ð2−T k Þ  k¼1  Both are valid with i ∈ N and i N 1. In order to apply the previous equations on real datasets, we must know the reﬂection coefﬁcient of the ﬁrst interface, which can be derived by using the available data and inverting the Eq. (24): R1 ¼  Ac1 : Ai1  ð27Þ  We therefore start with the independent assessment of the ﬁrst layer permittivity (see above), we successively apply Eqs. (23) through (27) and by iterating the process, we can derive the reﬂection coefﬁcients of all the n-1 interfaces and obtain the electric permittivity of the n layers (from Eq. (22A)). To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method, we considered the maximum error associated to all the experimental variables: the reﬂected and reference amplitudes, the electrical permittivity of the ﬁrst layer and the traveltimes. In order to describe the inﬂuences that the uncertainties associated to these quantities have on the inversion results, we applied the formula for the propagation of the maximum errors (e.g. Fornasini, 2008). For a physical quantity y depending from a deﬁnite number of variables {xn}N n = 1, all with a measured value Xn and a maximum error Δxn, the maximum error of y can be calculated as:    N    X  ∂F ! ! Δy ¼   x ¼ X Δxn    ∂x n n¼1  ð28Þ  with y = F(x1, x2,..., xN) and xn = Xn + Δxn. 5. Results 5.1. Application to synthetic data We ﬁrst test the applicability and validate the proposed methodology on a synthetic model made of homogeneous layers, bounded by planar and parallel joints, which is a reasonable approximation of zones close to each measurement point in real glaciers. The values of density  141  and thickness of each layer are typical of a glacier, with density increasing with depth; a density inversion was introduced to test the robustness of the proposed method (Table 3). Based on this model, we calculate two synthetic GPR traces (at zero and 70 cm offset, respectively) using a generic wavelet, since the essential parameter is the peak amplitude value of the reﬂections from the simulated interfaces. We then apply the previously described procedure to such traces to reconstruct the initial model parameters, i.e. the relative permittivity distribution based on picked amplitude values (Table 4). Peak amplitudes Aci, polarities and two-way travel times of the reﬂected waves can be easily obtained from the synthetic traces, due to lack of noise and of interferences between reﬂected waves. Amplitude Ai1 and polarity of the wave incident on the ﬁrst interface are obtained from the initial wave packet. The relative permittivity of the ﬁrst layer is an input parameter, directly taken from the model in the synthetic case. In order to apply Eq. (28), we add an error of ±0.2 to this value, typical of real permittivity measurement uncertainties, while we add an error equal to half of the last signiﬁcant digit (Fornasini, 2008) to both amplitudes and traveltimes. The obtained results are very close to the initial model. The proposed procedure is therefore able to properly reconstruct the initial model in a noise- and interference-free environment, even if the overall errors, representing the maximum expected error for each calculated parameter, can be quite high. Table 4 reports the inversion results for a zero offset acquisition at normal incidence (A) and at 70 cm offset (B), 70 cm being the typical offset of 200–300 MHz GPR antennas. Fig. 3A shows the path length calculated for different reﬂection depths at zero (P1) and 70 cm offset (P2), while Fig. 3B highlights the differences between the two considered path lengths. We can notice that the differences are negligible for the selected offsets and the inversion results are almost identical for targets at depths larger than about 1 m, corresponding to typical real glacial structures. This behavior is evident in Table 4, where the thickness of the ﬁrst layer is equal to 3 m and the results are consistent. Comparing the two inversion results we can in fact easily observe the negligible effect of the offset on the model's reconstruction. The synthetic case shows that the zero-offset approximation does not introduce signiﬁcant errors in the inversion process for realistic offset/target depths. The proposed method can be reliably applied in most, if not all, GPR applications to glaciology, when the acquisition parameters and the glacier stratigraphy fall in the average range considered in the synthetic test. In such case, the effects of offset are negligible and the inversion process does not require angles of incidence and transmission at each interface. The opposite case, i.e. offset effects not negligible, requires a detailed knowledge of the EM wave velocity ﬁeld to calculate incidence and transmission angles but it seldom met GPR glaciological studies. 5.2. Application to real data We further test the proposed methodology on real data from an alpine glacier: the Eastern Glacier of Mt. Canin (South-Eastern Italian Alps). The data acquisition system is a ProEx Malå Geoscience GPR, Table 3 Parameters of the synthetic model used to test and validate the proposed procedure. the bold row is related to a density inversion. h i  	 Layer ρ cmg 3 WE [m] v cm Δz [m] εr ns 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6)  0.3 0.6 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9  3 5 3 9 13 18  1.54 2.24 1.98 2.51 2.81 3.12  24.20 20.06 21.30 18.93 17.91 16.97  38.30  142  E. Forte et al. / Journal of Applied Geophysics 99 (2013) 135–145  Table 4 Results obtained by inverting the synthetic GPR data calculated for the model with parameters reported in table-3. A) zero offset and B) 70 cm offset. h i  	 Layer ρ cmg 3 v cm Δz [m] εr ns A) Results with zero offset  B) Results with 70 cm offset  1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6)  0.30 0.60 0.50 0.70 0.80 0.90 0.30 0.60 0.50 0.71 0.81 0.90  ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ±  0.10 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.12 0.12 0.10 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.12 0.12  equipped with 250 MHz shielded antennas, at a constant 70 cm offset. The processing ﬂow before amplitude picking includes: drift removal (zero time correction), elevation (static) correction, geometrical spreading correction using a constant velocity estimated by CMP data analysis, bandpass ﬁltering, and 2-D time migration. Data must be processed in true amplitude, avoiding to apply algorithms that affect trace amplitudes, like AGC or any arbitrary mathematical functions like ABC curves. In fact, only in this case we can consider the picked amplitudes exclusively related to the subsurface electric impedances contrast, i.e. to the values of the reﬂection coefﬁcients. Fig. 4 shows an example of depth-converted proﬁle (at a constant velocity of 20 cm/ns), used for the automatic picking of the largest positive and negative amplitude values of seven horizons, from H0 (air wave, used as the reference amplitude), to H6 (glacier bottom, not used for the density analysis). Letters “L” label layers considered homogeneous from the glaciological point of view (L1–L6). This section is representative of a typical situation for temperate glaciers: the  Fig. 3. A) Analysis of the path lengths at zero offset (P1) and 70 cm offset (P2). B) Differences of the two situations with variable simulated target depths.  2.99 4.99 3.00 8.98 12.97 17.98 3.00 4.98 3.00 8.97 12.96 17.95  ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ±  0.21 0.33 0.21 0.59 0.85 1.18 0.21 0.33 0.21 0.59 0.85 1.18  1.54 2.25 1.99 2.52 2.82 3.13 1.54 2.25 1.99 2.53 2.82 3.14  ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ±  0.20 0.29 0.26 0.33 0.37 0.41 0.20 0.29 0.26 0.33 0.37 0.41  24.17 20.01 21.25 18.89 17.87 16.95 24.17 20.02 21.25 18.87 17.85 16.93  ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ± ±  WE [m] 1.57 1.30 1.38 1.23 1.16 1.10 1.57 1.30 1.38 1.23 1.16 1.10  38.40 ± 8.5  38.43 ± 8.5  shallowest part is well-stratiﬁed (snow of the last and recent years), the intermediate part is almost transparent to EM waves (ﬁrn), while the deepest layer is transparent, but has internal diffractions (ice with internal debris). In this case, H5 marks the top of debris/moraine embedded in the glacier, which is calibrated also by direct measurements and old photographs. Such materials show high amplitude reﬂections/ diffractions, preventing any analysis of deeper targets. For this reason, the proposed methodology is applied to horizons H1 to H5 only. From the processed GPR data, we extract not only the reﬂection amplitude, but we calculate also the instantaneous amplitude (trace envelope), which is a measure of the reﬂectivity strength (Arcone et al., 2003). Such attribute is proportional to the square root of the energy of the signal at an instant in time, thus providing an estimate of the energy distribution. Anyway, for this speciﬁc case, we observe very similar results using reﬂection strength and simple reﬂection amplitude and therefore we focus only on the latter. By using the amplitudes of each horizon (including the air wave as reference) and a relative electric permittivity of 1.55 ± 0.24 for the uppermost layer (deduced from the mean values of velocity obtained by interpolating the ground wave on the available CMPs), we apply Eq. (27) and then, iteratively, Eqs. (22B), (26) and (23) in this order, thus obtaining the reﬂection coefﬁcients at each interface. We then apply Eq. (22A) and the Looyenga's formula (Eq. 17) to calculate the densities of all the layers (from L1 to L5) from each GPR trace. We adopt Eq. (17) because the glacier was entirely at sub-freezing temperatures during data acquisition. Therefore, the effects of liquid water on the propagation of GPR waves are negligible. The results are shown by Fig. 5A. It's interesting to note that the densities increase with increasing depths, as expected. Moreover, the calculated density values often show large lateral variations, since the procedure is applied to single traces and therefore the results are completely independent from one trace to the others. Such remarkable lateral changes are partly unrealistic and are probably due to amplitude variations related to interference and diffraction phenomena. Such rapid variations are also more evident due to the small spatial sampling interval commonly adopted for CO proﬁle acquisitions (in the present case 16 cm). In order to highlight the major density variations along the proﬁle, it is convenient to smooth the density data. Fig. 5B shows the results obtained by applying a smoothing through a laterally sliding window of ﬁxed 101 traces length, empirically selected as an optimum value to obtain realistic density proﬁles in the present conditions. In our example we observe that, besides the density apparently increasing with depth up to more than 0.5 g/cm3, there are relevant lateral variations, which cannot be detected from the interpolation of data obtained by direct measurements. The analysis of the errors obtained from the application of Eq. (28) to all the equations used in the inversion allows an estimate of the reliability of the results. The relative electrical permittivity of the shallowest layer, obtained from linear regression of the ground wave travel times on the available CMP gathers, is 1.55 ± 0.24 (see above for details), while a maximum error of half of the last signiﬁcant digit is considered adequate for both picked traveltimes and amplitudes. Table 5 reports  E. Forte et al. / Journal of Applied Geophysics 99 (2013) 135–145  143  Fig. 4. Interpretation and amplitude picking on a full-processed 250 MHz common offset GPR section. Interpreted horizons are marked as “Hn”, while the layers as “Ln”. See text for further details.  the mean value of the density's maximum errors of each layer, calculated by applying Eq. (28) with the uncertainties described above. It is apparent that the maximum expected errors are always smaller than 0.125 g/cm3, which is a quite good result for bulk WE estimations.  Fig. 6 is the superposition of the smoothed density values of Fig. 5B on the full-processed depth GPR proﬁle. As previously described, the amplitude analysis aims at density estimation and it stops at the top of a debris layer covering the high-density ice close to the bottom of the glacier. We can notice that the density of each layer is calculated for each horizon on each trace and that the proposed method is completely independent from the interpreter, besides the initial horizon interpretation and amplitude picking. However, in order to better highlight the main density changes along the proﬁle, the user can adjust the smoothing window length. In the present case, we actually detect not only important vertical density contrasts, but also lateral variations probably related to both thickness changes and to different snow accumulation mechanisms (wind effects, avalanches, morphology). It is also possible to recalculate for each trace, with higher detail, the total thickness of the analyzed frozen materials by using the electrical permittivities calculated from the original (i.e. unsmoothed) densities inverting the Looyenga's formula (Eq. 17) and subsequently the velocities with Eq. (13). Combining the estimated thicknesses with the densities, we can further calculate the WE for the entire proﬁle (Fig. 7). The maximum errors in this ﬁgure are quite large, especially for the WE. In fact, this value is obtained by combining the uncertainties of both layer thickness and density. Nevertheless, the main source of uncertainty is the independent estimation of the ﬁrst layer's permittivity, which then propagates to deeper layers. In any case, the results are very useful in practical applications, if we consider that it is possible to reconstruct a 3-D density (or WE) distribution, which gives evidence of both vertical and lateral variations, by combining several intersecting GPR proﬁles.  Table 5 Mean maximum errors associated to the calculated density values of all the layers. h i h i Layer Δρi cmg 3 Layer Δρi cmg 3 Fig. 5. A) Densities calculated for each trace from layer L1 (shallow) to layer L5 (deep) applying the proposed methodology on data shown on Fig. 4. B) Smoothing of the previous data with a 101 traces moving window.  1) 2) 3)  0.116 0.119 0.120  4) 5)  0.122 0.124  144  E. Forte et al. / Journal of Applied Geophysics 99 (2013) 135–145  Fig. 6. Smoothed density data superimposed on the full-processed depth-converted GPR proﬁle. We can observe large vertical variations, from fresh snow up to ﬁrn, but also considerable lateral density changes.  6. Conclusions The proposed methodology allows rapid estimation of the electric permittivity of frozen materials from common offset (i.e. single-fold) GPR data. It uses reﬂection amplitudes to calculate the reﬂection coefﬁcients for all the considered interfaces, from the shallowest to the ice/ bedrock or ice/basal moraine, with a recursive procedure. It further allows to evaluate the nature of the frozen material, from fresh snow, to ﬁrn and ice, and to estimate the WE, useful to ﬁnd the actual water volume within a frozen body, by using the available empirical relations linking velocity/permittivity to density. The proposed method can be summarized as follows: A) Picking of the amplitudes and traveltimes of all the horizons of interest (including the air wave amplitude as reference) on migrated, true amplitude GPR CO time sections. B) Estimation of the electrical permittivity of the ﬁrst layer using independent methods such as CMP ground wave analysis, dedicated trans-illumination measures or direct density measures.  Fig. 7. Calculated thickness (line-A) and WE (line-B), with related error bars, for the GPR proﬁle of Fig. 4, from the topographic surface of the glacier up to horizon H5, using the velocities derived from the inferred unsmoothed electrical permittivities.  C) Determination of the reﬂection/transmission coefﬁcients at each interface (applying Eq. (27) and then, iteratively, Eqs. (22B), (26) and (23) in this order). D) Determination of relative electrical permittivities of each layer (Eq. 22A). E) Calculus of densities of each layer (Eq. 17). Therefore, besides the reﬂected amplitude at any interface of interest, the proposed method requires knowledge of: the reference amplitude (i.e. the amplitude of the source wavelet) and the electrical permittivity value of the ﬁrst layer. The assumptions that the ﬁrst parameter is the highest amplitude of each trace and that the latter is a constant value obtained by CMP analysis are robust ones. In fact, a 20% change of the mean reference amplitude makes a change of 2.2% in the density value, which is lower than the overall accuracy of the method. On the other hand, our error analysis demonstrates that a large error in the estimation of the permittivity of the ﬁrst layer will produce strong changes of the density values. Nevertheless, the velocity of the shallowest layer and therefore its density can be constrained by combining analyses of the ﬁrst reﬂection and of the ground wave on the available CMP gathers, using direct density measures or with dedicated trans-illumination experiments. The integration of GPR common offset data with other geophysical techniques, like TDR measurements, could further improve the determination of this parameter. The proposed technique was tested and validated on synthetic data and on real data of an alpine glacier (Eastern Glacier of Mt. Canin). The obtained results are consistent with the ones derived by other techniques, but a one-to-one comparison is almost impossible for a real situation because direct density proﬁles cannot be realistically extended to depths exceeding a few meters (especially if thick debris levels are present); the same problem plagues the TDR approach. On the basis of the tests performed, we can conclude that the average density values for different levels can be achieved with acceptable accuracy in dry snow/ ﬁrn. The quite good accuracy in the estimate of both the average density, the thickness of frozen materials and the WE from CO GPR data, indicates that the proposed approach is effective and reliable also in environments characterized by mixed and sometimes chaotic materials containing ice, ﬁrn, snow, debris, moraines and boulders. The method  E. Forte et al. / Journal of Applied Geophysics 99 (2013) 135–145  cannot be directly applied to more complex situations, as in the presence of multi-phase mixed ﬂuids. The proposed approach does not require any velocity estimation as input, but it rather starts from amplitudes analysis to derive the electrical permittivity. The latter parameter is then used to calculate the density of the materials. The EM velocity ﬁeld can nonetheless be easily determined from the calculated permittivities as a side product of the procedure. The proposed method can further provide information about the evolution of a glacier through comparison of several GPR surveys conducted in different years at the same location. The glacier-facies distribution resulting from the application of the method provides valuable spatial information about the total mass balance beyond the usually evaluated winter balance. A detailed knowledge of the frozen material densities, besides volume variations, is instrumental in achieving an accurate mass balance. This parameter needs particular consideration in areas where both snow accumulation and meltwater retention by refreezing are highly variable in space and time. Therefore GPR techniques can become a fast and effective tool not only in glacial qualitative studies, but also in detailed glacier monitoring. Acknowledgments This research is funded by the “Finanziamento di Ateneo per progetti di ricerca scientiﬁca — FRA 2012” of the University of Trieste. Several other institutions ﬁnancially or logistically supported this project: Unione Meteorologica del Friuli Venezia Giulia, Comunità Montana del Gemonese, Canal del Ferro e Valcanale, Direzione Centrale Risorse Rurali, Agroalimentari e Forestali — Servizio neve e valanghe, Ente Parco Naturale delle Prealpi Giulie, Protezione Civile Regione Friuli Venezia Giulia, Osservatorio Meteorologico Regionale ARPA-FVG, V Rgt. Cavalleria dell'aria “Rigel” — Casarsa (PN), and Promotur Sella Nevea-Canin. We gratefully acknowledge Halliburton through the University of Trieste Landmark academic grant. We kindly thank Annelore Bezzi, Sergio Buricelli, Marco Lipizer, Simone Pillon and Michele Potleca for the help in the acquisition and analysis of topographic data and Francesca Bearzot, Marco B. Bondini, Costanza Del Gobbo, Stefano Pierobon and Marco Venier for the ﬁeldwork operations and the geophysical data acquisition. References Al-Dajani, A., Alkhalifah, T., Dale Morgan, F., 1999. Reﬂection moveout inversion in azimuthally anisotropic media: accuracy, limitations and acquisition. Geophys. Prospect. 47, 735–756. Annan, A.P., Cosway, S.W., Sigurdsson, T., 1994. GPR for snow water content. Fifth International Conference on GPR. Waterloo Centre for Groundwater research, Univ. of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, pp. 465–475 (1994). Arcone, S.A., 1996. High resolution of glacial ice stratigraphy: a ground-penetrating radar study of Pegasus Runway, McMurdo Station, Antarctica. Geophysics 61, 1653–1663. Arcone, S.A., Peapples, P.R., Liu, L., 2003. Propagation of a ground-penetrating radar (GPR) pulse in a thin-surface waveguide. Geophysics 68, 1922–1933. Arcone, S.A., Spikes, V.B., Hamilton, G.S., 2005. Phase structure of radar stratigraphic horizons within Antarctic ﬁrn. Ann. Glaciol. 41, 10–16. Barrett, B.E., Murray, T., Clark, R., 2007. Errors in radar CMP velocity estimates due to survey geometry, and their implication for ice water content estimation. J. Environ. Eng. Geophys. 12 (1), 101–111. Benn, D.I., Evans, D.J.A., 2010. Glaciers and Glaciation, 2nd ed. Hodder Education, London978-0340905791 (816 pags). Birchak, J.R., Gardner, C.G., Hipp, J.E., Victor, J.M., 1974. High dielectric constant microwave probes for sensing soil moisture. Proc. IEEE 62, 93–98. Blindow, N., Thyssen, F., 1986. Ice thickness and inner structure of the Vernagtferner (Ötztal Alps): results of electromagnetic reﬂection measurements. Z. Gletscherk. Glazialgeol. 22 (1), 43–60. Bradford, J.H., 2006. Applying reﬂection tomography in the postmigration domain to multifold ground-penetrating radar data. Geophysics 71 (1), K1–K8. Bradford, J.H., Harper, J.T., 2005. Wave ﬁeld migration as a tool for estimating spatially continuous radar velocity and water content in glaciers. Geophys. Res. Lett. 32, L08502.  145  Bradford, J.H., Harper, J.T., 2006. Measuring complex dielectric permittivity from GPR to estimate liquid water content in snow. SEG International Exposition and 76th Annual Meeting. , 3, pp. 1590–1594. Bradford, J.H., Harper, J.T., Brown, J., 2009a. Complex dielectric permittivity measurements from ground-penetrating radar data to measure liquid water content in snow in the pendular regime. Water Resour. Res. 45, W08403. Bradford, J.H., Nichols, J., Mikesell, T.D., Harper, J.T., 2009b. Continuous proﬁles of electromagnetic wave velocity and water content in glaciers: an example from Bench Glacier, Alaska, USA. Ann. Glaciol. 50, 1–9. Brown, J., Bradford, J.H., Harper, J.T., Pfeffer, W.T., Humphrey, N., Mosley-Thompson, E., 2012. Georadar-derived estimates of ﬁrn density in the percolation zone, western Greenland ice sheet. J. Geophys. Res. 117, F01011. Dix, C.H., 1955. Seismic velocity from surface measurements. Geophysics 34, 180–195. Fornasini, P., 2008. The Uncertainty in Physical Measurements: An Introduction to Data Analysis in the Physics Laboratory. Springer0-387-78649-X (161 pp.). Godio, A., 2009. Georadar measurements for the snow cover density. Am. J. Appl. Sci. 6 (3), 414–423. Granlund, N., 2009. Estimation of Snow Wetness Using Multi-Offset Ground Penetrating Radar. Towards More Accurate Estimates of Snow Water Equivalent. (Published Licentiate Thesis) Universitetstryckeriet, Luleå978-91-7439-062-9 (Ed., 2009, 79 pp.). Granlund, N., Lundberg, A., Feiccabrino, J., Gustafsson, D., 2009. Laboratory test of snow wetness inﬂuence on electrical conductivity measured with ground penetrating radar. Hydrol. Res. 40 (1), 33–44. Grasmueck, M., Weger, R., Horstmeyer, H., 2005. Full-resolution 3D GPR imaging. Geophysics 70 (1), K12–K19. Gretchka, V., Tsvankin, I., Cohen, J.K., 1997. Generalised Dix equation and modeling of normal moveout in inhomogeneous media. 67th Ann. Int. Mtg., SEG (1997). Harper, J.T., Bradford, J.H., 2003. Snow stratigraphy over a uniform depositional surface: spatial variability and measurement tools. Cold Reg. Sci. Technol. 37, 289–298. Kopp, M., 1962. Conductivitè èlectrique de la neige. Math. Phys. 13, 431–441. Kovacs, A., Gow, A.J., Morey, R.M., 1995. The in situ dielectric constant of polar ﬁrn revisited. Cold Reg. Sci. Technol. 23 (3), 245–256. Looyenga, H., 1965. Dielectric constants of heterogeneous mixtures. Physica 31, 401–406 (1965). Lundberg, A., Richardson-Näslund, C., Andersson, C., 2006. Density variations: consequences for ground-penetrating radar. Hydrol. Process. 20, 1483–1495. Macheret, Yu.Ya, Moskalevsky, M.Yu, Vasilenko, E.V., 1993. Velocity of radio waves in glaciers as an indicator of their hydrothermal state, structure and regime. J. Glaciol. 39 (132), 373–384. Mofﬁtt, L.R., 1964. Time domain reﬂectometry — theory and applications. Engineering Design News, 11 38–44. Montalbetti, J.F., 1971. Computer determination of seismic velocities — a review. J. Can. Soc. Explor. Geophys. 7, 32–45. Moore, J.C., Pälli, A., Ludwing, F., Blatter, H., Jania, J., Gadek, B., Glowacki, P., Mochnacki, D., Isaksson, E., 1999. High-resolution hydrothermal structure of Hansbreen, Spitsbergen, mapped by ground-penetrating radar. J. Glaciol. 45 (151), 524–532. Murray, T., Booth, A., Rippin, D.M., 2007. Water-content of glacier-ice: limitations on estimates from velocity analysis of surface ground-penetrating radar surveys. J. Environ. Eng. Geophys. 12 (1), 87–99. Olhoeft, G.R., 1998. Electrical, magnetic, and geometric properties that determine ground penetrating radar performance. Proceedings of GPR'98, 7th Int. Conference on GPR, pp. 177–182. Paterson, W.S.B., 1994. The Physics of Glaciers, 3rd edition. Elsevier Science, Tarrytown, N.Y978-0123694614 (480 pp.). Pipan, M., Baradello, L., Forte, E., Prizzon, A., Finetti, I., 1999. 2-D and 3-D processing and interpretation of multi-fold ground penetrating radar data: a case history from an archaeological site. J. Appl. Geophys. 41/2-3, 271–292. Pipan, M., Forte, E., Dal Moro, G., Sugan, M., Finetti, I., 2003. Multifold ground-penetrating radar and resistivity to study the stratigraphy of shallow unconsolidated sediments. Lead. Edge 22 (9), 876–881. Previati, M., Godio, A., Ferraris, S., 2011. Validation of spatial variability of snowpack thickness and density obtained with GPR and TDR methods. J. Appl. Geophys. 75, 284–293. Robin, G. de Q., 1975. Velocity of radio waves in ice by means of borehole interferometric techniques. J. Glaciol. 15 (73), 151–160. Stacheder, M.C., Huebner, S., Schlaeger, S., Brandelik, A., 2005. Combined TDR and low frequency permittivity measurements for continuous snow wetness and snow density determination. In: Kupfer, K. (Ed.), Electromagnetic Aquametry, 16. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 367–382 (2005). Stein, J., Kane, D.L., 1983. Monitoring the unfrozen water content of soil and snow using time domain reﬂectometry. Water Resour. Res. 19 (6), 1573–1584 (1983). Tillard, S., Dubois, J.C., 1995. Analysis of GPR data: wave propagation velocity determination. J. Appl. Geophys. 33, 77–91. Topp, G.C., Davis, J.L., Annan, A.P., 1980. Electromagnetic determination of soil water content: measurements in coaxial transmission lines. Water Resour. Res. 16, 574–582. Tronicke, J., Dietrich, P., Appel, E., 2000. Georadar velocity determination: a comparison of different techniques. Proceedings of the 6th Meeting Environmental & Engineering Geophysics, Sep. 2000, Bochum, Germany. Tsvankin, I., 1995. Inversion of moveout velocities for horizontal transverse isotropy. 65th SEG Meeting, Houston, USA, pp. 735–738 (Expanded Abstracts). VV. AA., 2011. Glossary of glacier mass balance and related terms. IHP-VII Technical Documents in Hydrology No.86. IACS Contribution No.2UNESCO, Paris. Yilmaz, Ö., 2001. Seismic Data Analysis: Processing, Inversion and Interpretation of Seismic Data, 2nd ed. vol. 1. SEG, Tulsa, OK978-1-56080-098-9 (998 pp.).  