Pue
Accounting for Surface Refraction in Velocity Semblance Analysis With Air-Coupled GPR
2016
IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Accounting for Surface Refraction in Velocity Semblance Analysis With Air-Coupled GPR
The aim of this study is to evaluate the velocity semblance analysis technique for air-coupled common midpoint (CMP) measurements with a small antenna offset. The technique was originally developed for seismic surveys, assuming the small spread approximation. Owing to the strong refraction at the surface and shallow investigation depth, this assumption is not valid in the case of air-coupled ground-penetrating radar (GPR). To overcome this assumption, a modification to the method is proposed accounting for the refraction at the surface. Synthetic experiments were executed to demonstrate that the traditional method resulted in a persistent overestimation, whereas the modified method improved the results significantly. Two field experiments have been conducted to test the method under different field conditions. In a first experiment on a road test site, the modified method improved the estimation of depth and propagation velocity significantly. However, the technique failed to estimate the propagation velocity and depth or objects in a second field test, due to rough terrain conditions and noise in the data. Therefore, an additional modification was proposed, by incorporating in-line data as well. This improved the depth and velocity estimations significantly. Overall, this study demonstrates that the traditional velocity semblance analysis (TRAD) is not valid for air-coupled GPR. By accounting for the refraction at the surface and incorporating inline data, it is possible to successfully estimate depth and propagation velocity with small offset air-coupled GPR configurations. 
Ground-penetrating radar (GPR), hydrology, pavement inspection
Noninvasive characterization of the subsoil or detection of subsurface features is an important challenge for science. Various techniques have been developed in the past decades with this objective, often based on electromagnetic wave propagation. Ground-penetrating radar (GPR) is such a method, which has proven to be effective for this purpose. In GPR, electromagnetic waves are emitted into the subsurface through a transmitting antenna. These waves are in the frequency range between 106 and 1010 Hz, and capable to penetrate through a low-conductive medium, such as soil, concrete, water, and rock. On interfaces of contrasting dielectric permittivity (ε), the waves are partially reflected and recorded at the surface with a receiving antenna [1]. Interpretation of GPR data is usually done in the time domain, as the travel time of the reflected waves is linked to the depth of a certain contrasting object. To convert travel time to the true depth, the propagation velocity v of the wave needs to be known. It is also a defining parameter in other processing procedures, e.g., migration or topographic correction [1]. In many cases, the propagation velocity remains unknown or is roughly estimated. However, neglecting the spatial variability and the heterogeneous character of the subsurface can lead to misguiding interpretation.
On the other hand, assessing v is often an objective. As shown in (1), the propagation velocity v is physically related to ε in low-loss, nonmagnetic soils. It can be linked to properties of the medium for which ε is a proxy. The applications are numerous, including the estimation of soil moisture [3], air void ratio of asphalt [4], concrete water content [5], and concrete thickness [6]. These possibilities make GPR an important noninvasive sensor in hydrological research and road/construction inspection [7]–[9] 
A complete overview of the various techniques existing to estimate ε from GPR data is given in various review works [2], [3], [10]. The method investigated in this study was developed to estimate vertical subsurface velocity variations in a noninvasive way for seismic measurements with multiple offsets between the transmitter and receiver [11]. The above-developed technique is called the velocity semblance analysis or normal moveout (NMO) analysis and is nowadays a common technique for GPR surveys as well. It is sometimes used to make time series [12], [13], demonstrating that the technique provides valuable data for analyzing the moisture dynamics along soil profiles, or is applied in geological studies to estimate the porosity profile [14].
Although it is a standard method in GPR, it has been critically investigated by several authors. The velocity semblance analysis has been proven to lead to unstable and erroneous results due to travel time drift, dipping reflectors, (multiple) backscattered refracted waves, and the semblance coherence measure. It is then suggested to increase the number of measurements by performing multifold surveys. Adapted from reflection seismics, this is a possible way to reduce the errors and allows to construct two-dimensional (2-D)/threedimensional (3-D) velocity models [15]–[18].
Most of these GPR surveys are using antenna offsets in the range of several meters and are usually ground-coupled. This makes multifold studies very elaborate and time-consuming. The antenna used in this study, however, has a maximal antenna offset of less than a meter and, more importantly, is air-coupled. Although both of these features have the benefit of making the antenna lightweight and versatile, and thus highly suitable for multifold studies, the setup is not appropriate for the velocity semblance analysis presented by Dix [11] (hereafter referred to as the traditional velocity semblance analysis or TRAD). As he pointed out, the technique should not be applied in case of strong refractions and relatively large antenna offsets.
These restrictions are called small spread approximation and have been investigated before [19], [20]. An alternative method to the velocity semblance analysis that is often suggested is the ray-based inversion scheme [21], based on the eikonal equation, or the asymptotic ray theory [20], [22], [23]. This bypasses the assumptions made in the small spread approximation, but requires travel time picking. Specifically for air-coupled systems, a method was described based on the same principles [24] and applied for constructing a single-layered soil model [25].
In this study, a modified velocity semblance analysis (MOD) is proposed for an air-coupled common midpoint (CMP) setup. It combines the ray-based approach to account for the refraction at the soil surface, with the velocity semblance analysis to construct a multilayered subsurface model without travel time picking. Moreover, the mobility of this GPR system allows to make multifold CMP measurements with a high spatial resolution. To exploit the value of this dataset to its maximum, the velocity is extended with hyperbolic fitting [26], [27] in an attempt to improve the stability of the field measurements. This method will be referred to as 3-D velocity semblance analysis (MOD3D). 
Section II describes the modified technique in detail. It is tested with synthetic data and validated with two field experiments in Sections III–V. 
Velocity semblance analysis
With only the travel time t known, it is impossible to retrieve the depth of a reflector z or the propagation velocity of the electromagnetic waves v from a single offset measurement. The velocity semblance analysis was developed to estimate z and v in seismic surveys using multioffset data [11]. Owing to the similar behavior of seismic and electromagnetic waves, it was later adopted in GPR analysis [16], [28]. Fig. 1 shows a CMP measurement. This measurement configuration consists of several GPR soundings with varying antenna offset, toward a reflective object or layer beneath the center of the antennas.
The two-way travel time (hereafter referred to as travel time) toward layer n tn (y) can be written as the sum of all travel times between the layers above τi (y) (2) and is dependent on the offset between the transmitting and the receiving antenna y. The travel time in case of offset y = 0 is referred to as the normal travel time t(0)
In this study, we assume that the soil is a horizontally layered medium as depicted in Fig. 2. When the antenna offset y = 0, refraction occurs at the interface between two contrasting layers. To calculate the travel time dependent on the offset, the power series expansion in (3) was developed [29]. In most analyses, the higher order terms (C2 , C3 , and higher) are neglected. This is the small spread approximation, valid when the antenna offset is small compared to the depth of investigation. With this assumption, (3) is reduced to (4). The root mean square velocity νn of layer n is defined in (5). Note that νn should not be confused with the propagation velocity in a layer vn . In an NMO  analysis, the root-mean-square velocity νn can be converted to NMO velocity, correcting for dipping interfaces [11]. Since this study only addresses horizontal interfaces, this is not required
Equation (4) shows the familiar hyperbolic relationship between travel time and antenna offset. By comparing the measured GPR data with predicted travel time hyperboles of (4), the unknown properties of a layer tn (0) and νn can be estimated. The semblance S is a quantity used to evaluate the signal coherency along the hyperbolic trajectory of a reflection. Equation (6) shows the calculation of the semblance coherence measure in this study. It is the sum of the measured signal energy along a predicted reflection hyperbole. As time domain data are complex in this study, the semblance is calculated as the sum of both the real and imaginary signal. This results in a 2-D tn (0) − νn space in which maxima indicate possible fitting values. Values for tn (0) and νn can be inverted with (7) and (8) to obtain the propagation velocity vn and the thickness of a layer zn . Note that νn depends on v in the layers above. It is possible that v is varying in the upper layers, but that no significant reflection occurs at their interfaces. In that case, no estimations of ν can be made for these layers and the inverted zn and vn will be erroneous
The small-spread approximation is not acceptable in the case of air-coupled GPR due to the refraction at the soil surface and the large antenna offset compared to the investigation depth [24], [25]. These errors may lead to a false estimation of, e.g., the reflector depth, soil water content, or pavement thickness. Methods with higher order approximations [30], [31] can improve the result, but introduce extra unknowns to be estimated. Another option is the (numerical) solution of (9a)–(9c), which describe the refraction at the surface. These equations are constructed using Snell’s law and trigonometry, where θ0 and θ1 are the angles of incidence and refraction, v0 and v1 the wave velocity of air and the soil, z0 the height of the antenna above the surface, z1 the depth of the layer, y0 the antenna offset, and y1 the offset between the transmitted and reflected wavepath at the surface (see also Fig. 1) 
The method proposed here suggests to subtract the effect of the refraction at the soil surface before performing the velocity semblance analysis. First, (9a)–(9c) are solved to determine the offset y1 . It will always be smaller than the antenna offset y0 and its value depends on the contrast in wave velocity v and z0 . The propagation velocity in air v0 is equal to the velocity in free space, c, while that of the soil v1 is set to the chosen ν.
A crucial step in this method is the determination of the height of the antenna above the soil surface. z0 is estimated from the time zero values t0 and the propagation velocity in air v0 with 10. As a small error in z0 can result in large errors in the velocity semblance analysis, a high precision, and a clear definition of t0 (y) are required. Setting the time zero is not a straightforward task, as it is influenced by material type and antenna configuration, among others [32]. In this study, it was decided to define the time zero at the zero amplitude point between the first negative and positive peak of the real signal, as illustrated in Fig. 3
In a second step, the travel time is calculated as the sum of the travel time in air and the travel time in the soil (11). In contrast to (4), tn (0) in (11) contains only the travel time in the subsurface. The predicted travel time is then used as in the TRAD to calculate the semblance S (6)
This procedure eliminates the refraction at the surface, after which the traditional method of Dix is applied. The small spread approximation is acceptable for subsurface layers, as the contrast in dielectric permittivity between soil layers is not as strong as at the surface.
Synthetic experiment
A synthetic experiment was conducted to compare the TRAD to the proposed MOD and to evaluate whether the proposed method is acceptable. A synthetic GPR-dataset was created using a known dielectric model and the Maxwell equations. Next, the velocity semblance analysis was applied to reconstruct the dielectric properties. 
Material and Methods
A 2-D horizontally layered dielectric model with one layer of air and three soil layers was used. The top soil layers were,  respectively, 0.3- and 0.6-m thick, allowing electromagnetic waves to travel with a propagation velocity of 1.1 × 108 and 1.4 × 108 m/s. Beneath these layers was another soil layer allowing a propagation velocity of 0.7 × 108 m/s. Note that it is not possible to estimate the propagation velocity of the bottom layer with this method, since there are no reflections from below this layer. The transmitting and receiving antennas were placed 0.15 cm above the soil surface, with an antenna offset ranging from 0 to 2 m. The transmitting antenna was mimicked by a radial emitting point source. The emitted signal was a Ricker wavelet with a center frequency of 1 GHz [33]. The boundary conditions of the model were perfectly matched layers, to avoid reflection from the boundaries [34]. Fig. 4 shows the dielectric model and the refracted and reflected wavepaths.
Simulations were performed with the finite-difference timedomain (FDTD) method [35], using the freely available software package MEEP [36], [37]. From this signal, the direct coupling was removed by subtracting synthetic skyshot data. A skyshot is a measurement in which no reflections are present, only the direct coupling. In the field, such a measurement can be done by pointing the antenna to the sky. In the FDTD simulation, it was created by removing the soil model. No further filtering was applied. The result is shown in Fig. 5. The synthetic data contain three reflection hyperboles, originating from the contrast in dielectric permittivity between the air–soil interface and the three soil layers. Other hyperboles that can be observed in Fig. 5 are multiples, which could disturb the analysis, although their energy is lower.
Results and Discussion
Fig. 6 shows the results for the TRAD and MOD method (Section II), respectively. Note that the horizontal axis in these graphs is the root-mean-square velocity ν, which needs to be inverted to propagation velocity v using (7). Table I shows the obtained v values in comparison with the true values for validation.
As expected, the TRAD fails to estimate the propagation velocity in the shallow soil layer correctly. The approximations made in the TRAD will always result in significant overestimations in the case of an air-coupled GPR. In this case, the propagation velocity estimated in the first layer was 1.416 × 108 m/s, whereas the true value was 1.100 m/s. Consequently, the thickness of the first layer was overestimated as well, 0.389 m instead of the 0.300 m (Table I). The MOD method, however, estimates the refraction at the surface much better at 1.150 × 108 m/s, and gives a good estimation of the first layer thickness as well, 0.317 m. In deeper layers, the error made by the TRAD method is more acceptable, as the small spread assumption is more valid for these cases. Both TRAD and MOD methods gave a good estimation of the propagation velocity in the second layer, 1.379 × 108 and 1.389 × 108 m/s, respectively, and similar results are obtained for the layer thickness, 0.592 and 0.590 m, respectively, which are close to the true thickness of 0.6 m depth.
Important to note from this experiment is that the local maxima in the velocity semblance analysis are not very pronounced, despite the absence of noise in this synthetic experiment. This is a consequence of the strong refraction at the surface. As  shown in Fig. 4, the offset between the transmitted wave and the reflected wave at the soil surface y2 becomes much smaller than the antenna offset y1 . In case of the synthetic experiment described here, y2 becomes only 17 cm, in the case of the first reflected layer with y1 = 100 cm. This is the equivalent of performing a ground-coupled CMP measurement with maximal 17 cm antenna offset. Inevitably, the estimations for the propagation velocity or thickness of shallow layers suffer from a high uncertainty. This effect is more pronounced when the antennas are high above the soil surface, and the dielectric permittivity of the first layer is high.
To further assess the error associated with the TRAD for aircoupled GPR, the difference in estimated propagation velocity with both methods was studied, for two air-coupled antennas above a homogeneous soil. The wavepath and associated travel time between the antennas and an reflector in the soil were calculated for antenna offsets until 1.0 m, and from this the velocity in the soil was estimated. This is repeated for reflectors until 1.5 m depth and soils with propagation velocities ranging from 0.1 × 108 to 2 × 108 m/s. Fig. 7 shows the difference between estimation and the true propagation velocity, which reflects the error associated with the TRAD, and hence due to the small spread approximation. A lower propagation velocity in the soil causes stronger refraction at the surface, resulting in a more problematic error when the TRAD is applied. Similar consequences arise when the reflector was located at a more shallow depth. The maximal antenna offset here was set at 1.0 m, comparable to the maximal antenna offset used in the field experiments of this study (Sections IV and V). When a larger antenna offset was used, the errors become larger. On the contrary, the errors were smaller when the antenna was set higher above the soil surface.
This analysis confirms that the TRAD results in erroneous estimations of propagation velocity and layer thickness, in particular for shallow layers. The MOD can reduce these errors and make accurate estimations throughout the soil profile. In the next section, we will demonstrate this using field data.
Field experiment 1
A first field experiment was conducted on a road pavement test site, to test how the MOD method performs in estimating the thickness of subsurface layers till 30 cm depth in rather optimal conditions.
Material and Methods
The survey was performed on the GPR test site of the Belgian Road Research Centre (BRRC) in Wavre, Belgium. It consists of four pavement sections with different materials and layer thicknesses, each with a subbase layer in crushed stone. The four different road configurations are as follows:
1) asphalt (4 cm depth) covering cobblestones (20 cm);
2) asphalt layer (4 cm) with a foundation layer (10 cm) on concrete plates (30 cm);
3) asphalt layer (4 cm) with a foundation layer (10 cm) on lean concrete (30 cm);
4) concrete layer (20 cm) on lean concrete separated by a thin asphalt layer.
The GPR system used was a Geoscope GS3F with VX1213 antenna array from manufacturer 3-D-Radar (Trondheim, Norway). The antenna array consisted of seven emitting and seven receiving air-coupled antennas. This multistatic setup allows both to measure along 13 parallel tracks with a fixed offset, and to perform a CMP measurement with seven different antenna offsets at the center. The maximal antenna-offset in case of a CMP measurement was 0.97 m. As this GPR configuration does not require ground contact and is relatively small in size, it is a versatile instrument that can be employed under rough conditions or for high speed multifold surveys.
The GPR is a stepped frequency continuous wave (SFCW) type of GPR, operating in the frequency domain. The transmitting antenna emits a continuous electromagnetic wave at a certain frequency into the soil, while simultaneously the receiving antenna records the reflected signal. By mixing the received and emitted signal in a quadrature mixer, the difference in amplitude and phase is measured during a certain dwell time. This procedure is done for a set of frequencies, usually ranging from a minimum to a maximum frequency with a fixed frequency step. In this study, a bandwidth from 200 to 3000 MHz was covered with a frequency step of 2 MHz and a dwell time of 2μs. This allowed to make multifold CMP measurements with an interval of 5 cm along the transect.
The following processing procedure was applied to convert the raw frequency domain data to the final time domain data, as it is used in the velocity semblance analysis.
Removing direct coupling: By subtracting data from a skyshot, both direct coupling and internal noise/reflections were eliminated. This step is required to allow the detection of the time ground.
Conversion to time domain: This crucial step in the processing was executed by performing the inverse fast Fourier transform (IFFT) [38]. To reduce the effect known as leakage around reflectors, the data were windowed with a Kaiser window (β = 6) [39].
Time ground: As described in Section II, the time ground is determined at the zero-intersect of the real wave component.
Background noise removal: Time domain data are dominated by background noise, resulting from ringing, internal reflections, or external interference. Various techniques have been developed to suppress this noise, most of them having as side effect the removal of large horizontal features out of the data as well. In an attempt to reduce this effect, the filter applied in this study was the eigenimage filtering using singular value decomposition [40], [41].
Gain: To compensate for attenuation and spherical energy losses, an instantaneous automatic gain control was applied [42]. For each channel separately, the median absolute energy at every travel time was corrected to a reference value.
Fig. 8 shows the processed GPR data along the transect.
Following the data filtering and gain, the TRAD and MOD was performed, as described in Section II. The optimal estimation of tn (0) and νn for each layer interface n was picked as a local semblance maximum within a t(0) window. The window was determined based on the observations in the transect, as shown in Fig. 8. The results were consequently inverted to zn and vn with 7 and validated using the known interface depth. The validation indices used in this study are mean error (ME), root-mean-square error (RMSE), Pearson correlation coefficient (R), and relative error (RE).
Results and Discussion
The resulting transect with the estimated depth estimations with both semblance methods is shown in Fig. 9, together with the true depth. It can be observed that every measurement not returned valid inversion results for all layers. 9.2% of the layer depths could not be inverted with the TRAD method, with the MOD method this was 8.5%. This is a result of error propagation in the recursive inversion procedure, inaccurate estimations at the surface layers affect the estimations for deeper layers. Moreover, the coefficient of variation of the depth estimations for all layers with both methods was 31.7% and 27.0% respectively, whereas the velocity estimates have similar coefficients of variation. As the layers in the test site are supposed to be homogeneous and constant in depth, this coefficient of variation reflects the uncertainty of the estimations. Section D of the test site showed a 418 particularly high variation for the estimation of the first layer depth. This results from the concrete material in the pavement construction, which strongly attenuates the signal. In the other sections, the attenuation in the surface layers was less pronounced. The weak signal in Section D of the test site resulted in a less stable performance of the velocity semblance analysis.
Table II shows the validation indices for layer depth and propagation velocity, respectively. In accordance with the observations in the synthetic experiment (Section III), depths and velocities were overestimated when the refraction at the surface was not accounted for in an appropriate way. The ME for interface depth was a multifold higher with the TRAD method: 0.123 m compared to 0.024 m for the MOD method. The accuracy of the depth estimates improves significantly as well. The RMSE for depth estimation with the TRAD method is 0.175 m, compared to 0.061 m with the MOD method. The velocity validation indices in Table III leads to similar conclusion.
As demonstrated in the synthetic experiment in Section III, the TRAD method overestimated zn and vn , especially for the uppermost layer. The scatterplots in Fig. 10 for z confirm this finding. The MOD method seems to correct this bias, with validation indices being lower. However, when comparing these values to those encountered in literature or expectations, they are still much higher. Other studies found REs ranging from 3% to 12% for depth estimation with surface reflection method [25]. This method with travel time picking and inversion results in REs between 1% and 23% for single-layered subsurface. As stated before, a low signal to noise level, particularly in the channels with larger offsets impede stable and accurate results. Also multiples between the antenna and the soil surface perturb the dataset, but the most important reason of the relatively low accuracy is the small antenna offset of the used GPR configuration. This results in a large uncertainty for the velocity estimation. The recursive inversion procedure furthermore propagates the uncertainty to deeper layers.
Field experiment 2
A second field test was conducted on a test field with metal objects inserted at known depths with the aim of testing several approaches to estimate their depth. The conditions encountered at the test site were less favorable for GPR survey in comparison to the test in Section IV. The terrain was rough and moist, resulting in strong signal attenuation and a difficult background removal procedure.
Materials and Methods
The test field where this experiment was performed is located in Lovendegem, Belgium. It was a grassland with moderately wet loamy sand and a spodic horizon at 0.5 m depth, which is an impermeable layer enriched with Fe and Al oxides and hydroxides. The soil type is a Cambisol according to the World Reference Base classification. Metal pipes inserted at known depths allow validation of the velocity semblance analysis. Fig. 11 shows the processed GPR data along the transect and the reflections of the inserted objects are highlighted.
The same GPR configuration and processing procedures as in Section IV were applied. An example of the resulting GPR data used in the velocity semblance analysis is shown in Fig. 12. This is a one-sided CMP measurement with seven antenna offsets, ranging from 0.1 to 1.0 m. The measurement shown was performed at the location of a buried empty pipe at 0.4 m depth, the reflection of which can be observed around 13 ns travel time. Note that this data is still heavily perturbed by noise, despite the filtering procedure. Needless to say this might affect the quality of further analysis.
The velocity semblance analysis was executed using both methods as described in Section II, to estimate the depth of the objects and the propagation speed in the soil. Since, the maximal antenna offset of the CMP measurements in this study was only 1 m and only seven antenna offsets were used, the uncertainty of the estimations can be very high. The fact that the antenna is air coupled amplifies this effect, as shown in the synthetic experiment (Section III). This is inherent to the nature of this lightweight, flexible antenna, which however has the advantage that it enables making many CMP measurements with a high spatial resolution. In this survey, a CMP measurement was done with an inline interval of 5 cm.
To fully exploit this benefit, the velocity semblance analysis on the CMP measurements was extended to with a third dimension, using data along the driving direction together with the multioffset measurements. This method proposed here, hereafter referred to as MOD3D, extends the MOD with a hyperbole fitting procedure, which follows basically the same procedure, along the driving direction for all antenna offsets. As shown in Fig. 13, the equivalent of the antenna offset y1 in (9) is in this case the sum of lateral distance between the transmitting antenna and the object xt and the lateral distance between the receiving antenna and the object xr . In this case too, the refraction at the surface is taken into account in a similar way, computing the travel time to the transmitting and receiving antenna separately. By extending the velocity semblance analysis with the hyperbole fitting in the driving direction, the stability of the analysis might be increased. Clearly, this is not an option for large horizontal reflectors, as they do not have a hyperbolic reflection.
In this study, four CMP measurements before and after a central CMP measurement were taken in account. With a spacing of 5 cm between each measurement, this resulted in maximal 20 cm before and after each measurement. This increased the number of data channels from 7 (number of antenna offsets) for the TRAD and MOD method to 63 (number of antenna offsets × number of CMP measurements included) for the MOD3D method. The amount of measurements included can be adjusted, taking in account the data quality and signal attenuation.
The resulting estimations of root-mean-square propagation velocity ν and normal travel time t(0) for all objects were inverted to retrieve the depth z and propagation velocity v in the soil layers with (7). In this dataset, it was not possible to make estimations for propagation velocity based on other reflections than those of the inserted objects, as they were too weak and could not be discriminated from noise content. Therefore, two approaches were used to perform this inversion: with or without assuming lateral variation in propagation velocity. Assuming there is no lateral variation allows to put the estimates ν and t(0) of all objects together in one profile, and invert it to v and z accordingly. This is not possible in the antithetical case, in which case the inversion is done at each location separately. The validation dataset was treated in the same way.
Results and Discussion
The propagation velocity for the most shallow object, at 0.2 m depth, was not correctly estimated with any of the methods in this study. As it is located near the soil surface, its reflection signal was strongly affected by ringing noise from the surface reflection. This disturbance might be the reason for the inability of the velocity semblance analysis to correctly estimate its depth or the propagation velocity above. Since, this affects underlying layers in the inversion procedure it was not further considered in this study.
The results of both inversions are plotted in Fig. 14 together with the true values. Validation indices are presented in Tables IV and V for z and v, respectively, and both inversions. Fig. 15 shows scatterplots of z and v, respectively, for both inversions. As in the previous tests, the TRAD overestimated the depth of the objects largely and did not lead to acceptable velocity estimations. The ME for both z and v was significantly higher in this survey, as compared to the test in Wavre with more favorable conditions. The RMSE in this experiment was also a multifold higher than that in Wavre.
In contrast to the field test 1 before, the MOD failed to improve the estimations. It performed even worse than the TRAD method. Only the MOD3D gave significantly better estimations of z and v, as appears also clearly in the validation indices.
Also in this survey, the inversion results of the estimation with homogeneous lateral soil layers resulted in unacceptable velocities (negative or higher than 3 × 108 m/s), although the inversion with true values resulted in a realistic profile [Fig. 14(b)]. In particular, the lower velocity near 0.5 m depth could correspond to the impermeable spodic horizon with a higher water content [43] and with a dry layer underneath. However, this could not be verified since no water content measurements were made at the time of the survey. None of the inverted results could capture a similar soil profile. The estimations with the velocity semblance analysis were not stable enough for the delicate inversion procedure, in which errors propagate strongly.
To further illustrate the different results of all methods, the resulting semblance for the data shown in Fig. 12 is shown in Fig. 16. All methods give a clear overestimation of the expected root-mean-square velocity ν. More importantly, the large spread maxima along the ν axis indicate the large uncertainty on the optimal estimation of propagation velocity, particularly for the MOD method. This is a direct result of the small antenna offset and the limited number of channels. Compared to the MOD method, the local maximum of the MOD3D method was more pronounced. The semblance image also contained less false local maxima, caused by noise and multiples. By calculating the semblance image from a larger data volume (the inline data were included in the 3-D analysis), a lower uncertainty and more stable estimations could be achieved. This demonstrates that it is possible to overcome the limitations of the small antenna offset and limited channels by including data along the driving direction.
Overall, it can be concluded that the TRAD fails to make correct estimations of the propagation velocity and object depth. Despite the efforts to improve the estimations with the MOD by accounting for the surface refraction, the results did not improve significantly. This unexpected lack of improvement with the MOD might be caused by the sensitivity of the method to the estimation of z0 . Small fluctuations in time ground can result in significant changes for the semblance analysis. The measurement was performed on a rough terrain to explore the limitations of the system, and this has shown to have a big impact on the estimations. Furthermore, background noise removal was hampered due to the uneven surface reflection and ringing noise. This made it impossible to estimate the propagation velocity in shallow layers and was perturbing the velocity semblance analysis. Results improved significantly when in-line data were incorporated in the analysis with the MOD3D. This improved the signal to noise ratio and allowed the algorithm to use more data. Moreover, the uncertainty of the estimations decreased as the maxima in the semblance data became more pronounced. This demonstrated that even in rather harsh field conditions, a velocity semblance analysis can be performed with a small antenna offset and air-coupled GPR, albeit not with the same accuracy as on more favorable (road) conditions.
Conclusion
Owing to the small spread approximation in the TRAD, which is commonly used to estimate the propagation velocity of the waves, the technique is not suitable for an air-coupled GPR configuration. In a synthetic experiment, it was shown that the refraction at the surface needs to be taken into account exactly. The TRAD resulted in an unacceptable overestimation of the velocity, in particular, when the reflector was at a shallow depth beneath the surface and the true propagation velocity was low. The MOD resolved the refraction at the soil surface numerically, resulting in correct estimations.
Measurements at two test fields with layers or objects at known depths were used to validate this MOD method. This showed too that the TRAD method was not accurate. Under favorable field conditions for GPR surveys on flat terrain, the MOD improved the estimations significantly. However, on rough terrain, the MOD failed to improve the estimations, as the method suffered from instability due to the small antenna offset, rough terrain conditions and noise in the data. By extending the velocity semblance analysis with hyperbolic fitting in the MOD3D, the quality and accuracy of the estimations improved significantly, despite the difficult terrain.
This modified technique is a valuable tool in the processing and interpretation of GPR data. For civil applications, such as pavement inspection or depth of buried features, a correct estimation of the propagation velocity is indispensable. Moreover, it can be linked to subsurface properties, such as soil moisture, allowing to construct water content profiles, which is valuable for, e.g., hydrological studies.
The true value of air-coupled CMP measurements is the mobility of the system, which allows to make field-covering studies relying on random reflectors in the subsurface, or high speed road inspection, which is impossible with groundcoupled GPR. Moreover, since it is an air-coupled system, the methods described here can be combined with the surface reflection technique to estimate soil properties at the surface.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank V. V. Parys for assisting with the fieldwork and E. Leue for helping with the artwork. They would also thank C. Grégoire and C. V. Geem of the Belgian Road Research Centre for the collaboration on the road test site in Wavre. Computational work was carried out using the Stevin Supercomputer Infrastructure at Ghent University, funded by Ghent University, the Hercules Foundation, and the Flemish Government—Department EWI. The calculations were done with the help of open source toolboxes scipy [44] and matplotlib [45]. This work is a contribution to COST Action TU1208 “Civil Engineering Applications of Ground Penetrating Radar.

Figures
Schematic representation of the CMP configuration showing the wavepaths between the transmitting (T) and the receiving (R) antennas. The widest offset is highlighted and variables in the equations are indicated.
Illustration of the velocity semblance analysis in a horizontally layered soil, indicating the variables used in the method.
Example of a time domain trace. Both real and imaginary components are plotted and the automatically detected time zero is indicated.
Schematic representation of the synthetic experiment, with the predicted wavepaths to each layer for an antenna offset of 1.5 m.
Resulting synthetic CMP data of the FDTD simulation with MEEP for a soil with two layers and air-coupled antennas. The white squares indicate the expected tn (0) for each layer interface.
Velocity semblance analysis result as derived from the (a) TRAD and (b) MOD methods. The true and estimated values for ν and t(0) are indicated with a red cross and white circle, respectively.
Difference in estimated propagation velocity between the TRAD and MOD as proposed in this study with air-coupled antenna 0.15 m off-ground and a maximal antenna offset of 1.0 m.
Transect of the testfield with the smallest antenna offset. The different sections are indicated with the corresponding letters.
Profile transect with the estimated depth of the layers with (a) TRAD and (b) MOD methods. Each layer received a different color, the true depth is indicated with the dashed line.
Scatterplot of estimated z after inversion and true depth with (a) TRAD and (b) MOD methods. The markers are transparent to show the density of the scattered values.
Transect of the testfield with the smallest antenna offset. The reflections of the inserted objects are indicated with red squares. They are located at following depths (from left to right): 0.4, 0.4, 1.0, 0.8, 0.6, 0.4, and 0.2 m.
Example of a CMP measurement, taken at the location of a buried pipe at 0.4 m depth. The reflection hyperbole of this object appears around 13 ns travel time in the smallest antenna offset.
Schematic representation of the MOD3D, incorporating data along the driving direction. The variables of the method are indicated.
Results after inversion to v and z. The estimations are indicated with the colored lines, and can be compared with the true values, shown with the dashed lines. (a) With lateral variation. (b) Without lateral variation. 
Scatterplot of estimations after inversion and true values for v and z. The three methods are illustrated with different colors. (a) z with lateral variation. (b) z without lateral variation. (c) v with lateral variation. (d) v without lateral variation.
Velocity semblance images with (a) TRAD, (b) MOD, and (c) MOD3D at the location of a buried pipe at 0.4 m depth (CMP data is shown in Fig. 12).

Tables
Results of the synthetic experiment after inversion
Validation field experiment 1: depth estimations z after inversion
Validation field experiment 1: propagation speed estimations v after inversion
Validation field experiment 2: depth estimations z after inversion
Validation field experiment 2: propagation velocity estimations v after inversion
