Qian
Ground penetrating radar surveys for permafrost assessment in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, China
2015
IEEE

Ground penetrating radar surveys for permafrost assessment in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, China Rongyi Qian *1, Jian Li1，Zongqi Mu1  Lanbo Liu 2  School of Geophysics and Geoinformation Technology, China University of Geosciences, Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: rongyiqian@cugb.edu.cn  Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA E-mail: Lanbo.Liu@UConn.edu  Abstract—The degradation of permafrost poses severe adverse impacts to the stability of the foundation of critical infrastructures like highway built on permafrost region like the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. Stabilization of the highway subgrade of the Qinghai-Tibet highway is still an unsolved problem and continuously poses threat to the operation of the highway as the major geo-hazard. The state of permafrost varies between freezing and thawing to respond to ambient temperature changes and this process generates the normal active layer above the permafrost. At a Cryosphere Research Station on the Qinghai Tibet Plateau (CRSQTP) near Xidatan, Qinghai, the depth of active layer ranges from 2.0 to 2.6 m and the depth of permafrost base ranging from 24 to 25m [Cheng and Wu, 2007]. New data show that soil temperatures at depths from 5 to 10 m increased by about 0.2°C between 2001 and 2003 [Cheng and Wu, 2007]. GPR surveys have been conducted on a site on the Beiluhe of Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau to characterize the status of the permafrost for fundamental geology and hydrogeology studies, as well as provide fundamental information for solving the engineering problem for stabilize foundations of civil infrastructures on the plateau region. This paper will report the newest results of our GPR observations in this region. Keywords—Qinghai-Tibet Plateau highway; GPR; permafrost  I.  INTRODUCTION  Permafrost is resulted from the interaction of ground gas systems when passing through the active layer. It is widely distributed in terrestrial cryosphere, which accounts for about 24% of the land area of northern hemisphere [1]. It plays a vital role in maintaining water and heat exchange between ground and air, vegetation and ecosystems, carbon cycle, as well as weather and climate system. Permafrost warming, melting and degradation can result in significant changes in water balance of land surface, ecosystems, surface hydrology, carbon cycle and geomorphological processes, which will lead to surface subsidence and undermine the stability of buildings in the permafrost zone [2]. Therefore, studies about the relationship between changes in permafrost and stability of engineering structures have increasingly drawn people’s attention. Permafrost in Tibetan Plateau area, accounting for 70.6 percent of its whole area, has widely developed [3]. Qinghai-Tibet Highway, which starts from Xining, Qinghai Province, in the north and reaches to Lhasa, Tibet, in the  south, is the longest asphalt road with the highest altitude in the world. Its total length is 1937 km, with an average altitude of 4,000 meters. It is built on large areas of permafrost and the roadbeds have made damage to the ecological environment of the original surface. Moreover, the asphalt pavement has exacerbated changes of permafrost in the lower part of the roadbed, which resulted in problems such as deformation and cracking of the pavement. The normal operation of the Qinghai-Tibet Highway has been seriously affected. Compared with the polar, permafrost in Tibetan Plateau area has the characteristics of thin layer, high ground temperature and solar radiation, which determine the particularity of changes in permafrost in this are. As foundation of engineering bearer, the thermal stability of permafrost is poor. It is very sensitive to global changes, especially for the permafrost with high ice content and high temperature. A smaller thermal perturbation could cause great changes of permafrost, which will lead to engineering instability. At the same time, due to the influence of plateau topography, the main infrastructure projects from Qinghai Province to Tibet, such as roads, railways, electricity, cables and pipelines, etc., are conducted in the narrow channel with the width of less than 10km, which means that engineering thermal fluctuation will make great influence on permafrost. Human activity, climate change and ecological environment changes, as well as other factors accelerate the degradation of permafrost in the region, which will profoundly affect stability of the project. The impact of climate change on Qinghai-Tibet highway asphalt pavement was not put into consideration when it was constructed at the beginning. No response measures to climate change was considered, neither the reasonable height of roadbed ， nor the engineering technique. As a result, the permafrost of the lower layer of 57% roadbed does not converge and melt sandwich appear, which even developed into groundwater [4]. It caused massive permafrost melting and subsidence [5-6]. Meanwhile, the original design of Qinghai-Tibet Highway did not pay enough attention to the importance of ecological environment and permafrost protection. Digging and excavating on both sides of the roadbed at will brought waterlogged depressions and hot melt depressions on both sides of the roadbed, which caused a lot of damage to permafrost made by man-made engineering construction. Although the impact of climate change and ecological destruction has been gradually given consideration  978-1-4799-6495-6/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE  in design and construction in the process of rebuilding Qinghai-Tibet Highway, there are still some problems. The thermal equilibrium of permafrost has been broken, and this heat-affection is a continuous dynamic process, which continuously affects thermal stability of permafrost [7]. The impact on permafrost made by human activities is 2-3 times greater than those of climate change. Therefore, it is very important to detect changes of permafrost in different areas on both sides of the Qinghai-Tibet Highway and study the influence on roadbed made by distribution characteristics of plateau permafrost and its degradation. Due to the high altitude, thin air, bad weather of QinghaiTibet Plateau and severe altitude sickness, it is very difficult to carry out all kinds of work. Therefore, there is little data for research. In this paper, the north side of Qinghai-Tibet Highway is selected as research areas, and potable and nondestructive technology ground penetrate radar detection method will be used to identify the characteristics of seasonally frozen ground and permafrost on both sides of Highway and study the relationship and interaction between road construction and permafrost. It will provide reference for engineering design and maintenance of Qinghai-Tibet Plateau.  II.  measurement is integrated with CMP measurements to measure. Dynamic differential gps is applied to positioning. Acquisition parameters are record length 500ns, and sample 625 point/scan. As the surface in study area is seriously melted in summer and autumn and rich in high moisture content, which absorbs radar greatly, collecting work was conducted in early December 2014. At this time, the temperature in research area was low and the surface has been frozen, which forms seasonally frozen ground. Therefore, the loss of radar energy that is absorbed by the surface is less and detection can reach deep inside, which allows us to obtain information with high signal to noise ratio. Perennial frozen soil interface can be detected and analyzed comprehensively with ground survey (see Fig. 2).  WL EL  INTRODUCTION OF RESEARCH AREA AND GPR DATA COLLECTION  This research area is located in Beiluhe County, Tibet Autonomous Region, the hinterland of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau (see Fig.1), its average altitude is above 4500m. It is typical permafrost roadbed along the Qinghai-Tibet Highway, which is high plains landscape generated by alluviation and eolian deposit. The terrain is slightly undulating in this area. Gully developed. Hilly and depression are interphase. Sand dunes are partly distributed. Stratum is mainly formed by quaternary alluvial sand, silt and silty clay layer, under which it is mainly tertiary mudstone, sandstone regolith. The annual average rainfall is about 300mm [12]. The annual average temperature is -5.0 ~ -3.8 ℃, and the annual average ground temperature is -2.0 ~ -0.5 ℃. The main type of permafrost is ice-rich frozen soil. There is soil-containing ice in some parts and its thickness is 50-80 meters. The upper limit of natural ground permafrost is -1.8 ~ -4m. Ground penetrate radar detection is the key method in the experiment in this study, which is an important technique, used in study the structure of permafrost. There are obvious dielectric differences on interface between permafrost and seasonal frozen soil, which provides a good physical basis for permafrost detection. Radar survey lines are arranged on both sides of Qinghai-Tibet Highway in Beiluhe area. It is perpendicular to the layout of highway which are arranged on the west side (WL) and the east side (EL) of the Qinghai-Tibet Highway. The WL's length is 250m and the EL's length is 200m. The surface survey lines passed is straw, bare areas and drop reservoirs. It is relatively flat and parts of the survey lines are undulating. The instrument used for data collection is Sensors & Software's PulseEKKO ground penetrating radar, whose antennas of 25MHz, 50MHz and 100MHz are used to collect data along the same survey line. Continuous  Fig. 1. The map showing Qinghai-Tibet highway and the test locations of the GPR data sections acquired discussed in this paper.  Fig. 2. The map showing the GPR collection work and the test site ground surface  The radar profile generated by 50MHz and 25MHz antenna and 100MHz antenna along the same measuring line position has similar characteristics that each can be divided into three-tier structure, which indicates that the data is reliable of the layers. The difference is that the data collected by 100MHz antenna has higher vertical resolution, which makes analysis of local details easy. As the depth of target layer is relatively shallow, data collected by 100MHz antenna  can meet the need of detecting depth. Therefore, the following focuses on analyzing the radar cross-section of 100MHz antenna.  Fig. 3. The difrent frequency antenna GPR section at the same location: 25MHz (a), 50MHz (b), 100MHz (c)  III. THE GPR PROFILE AND INTERPRATION As we know, radar detection detect the internal structure of the underground media through the information of received reflected waves, which is generated by the difference of the propagation velocity of electromagnetic waves caused by the difference of dielectric constant of media. The underground media of this test radar survey lines is formed by seasonally frozen ground, melting permafrost layer with ice and perennial permafrost, from the surface to the deep. Due to the big difference of its dielectric properties and the poor conductivity of freezing surface, which absorbs little electromagnetic wave energy, the flection GPR waves with high signal to noise ratio can be received. Not only a clear image of reflection features of subsurface can be received, but also the reliability of local anomalies is ensured, as there is little electromagnetic interference on Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. The nearby highway part radar profile of two survey lines of 100MHz antenna is shown in Figure 3, from which the three-tier structure can be seen clearly in the cross section. Affected by the superficial terrain, the reflection events of surface are the slightly undulating affected, but with good continuity, whose two-way time lasts 10 ~ 15ns. The continuity of 30 ~ 35ns reflection events is not as good as the one of 15 ~ 20ns, with severe undulation, which is presumed to be the lower interface of seasonally frozen ground. The continuity reflection events of two-way time of 45 ~ 55ns is good, with strong reflecting energy, which is inferred permafrost interface. Overall, due to the affection made by land cover, engineering construction and the ice containing rate of thawing ice layer, etc., the undulation of lower interface of seasonally frozen ground is  severe. According to drilling data, the media is mainly gravel layer, silt layer or weathered mudstone and shale, which has formed seasonally frozen ground because of the low temperature in December, seasonally has been formed. The depth of seasonally frozen ground is 0.5~1.2m. The depth of upper interface of perennial permafrost is 1.8~2.2m(Fig. 4).  Fig. 4. The three layer structure interprtion section on the highway layside: WL (a) and EL (b). The end of WL profile and the head of the EL are close to the roadbed. They are separated by the highway road,  IV.  ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION  A. Impacts of Highway to the frozen soil In order to detect the highway influence in permafrost regions two 40m survey lines are chosen for further analysis (Fig. 4). The right of the WL and The left of the EL are close with the highway road bed. It is observed that the depth of permafrost changes with the distance from the highway. The interface of the permafrost close to the high way buried much deeper into the ground than other places, the depth of the permafrost increase about 0.4m within just 40m and this tendency exists on both sides of the road (Fig. 4) also demonstrates that the permafrost with closer distance to the road is influenced by the high way the greater and the frozen soil degenerates. A continuous seasonal permafrost layer exists on the layer of permafrost. This is mainly because the quaternary frozen soil overlying the permafrost has high water content and it turns into seasonal frozen soil in December. Unlike permafrost, seasonal frozen soil is discrete because it suffers from many factors. In some outcropped zones of bedrock the layer is thin, and in some other places there even no evidence of the seasonal frozen soil. This might indicate that from the bottom of the road to 15m in line EL, the nearer to the roadbed, the faster the thickness increases (Fig.4, green circle). It means that the nearer to the high way, the lager the water content is and the more thicken the layer aquifer. That could lead to the appearance of standing water in the roadbed and too much retain water would wreck the high way roadbed. At the same time, road in the east side has higher water content than the west side and this is a sign that the dayside of the roadbed has more effect on the highway. Therefore, the relationship between highway subgrade and permafrost is interactive, destroy the original balance will speed up the  thawing of permafrost. On the other side, changes of the permafrost table would in turn affect the stability of roadbed and as we have seen, the influence of the roadbed already lead to many cracks in highway pavement today. In terms of tendency, permafrost that 0~15m away from the road is strongly affected by the highway, while the trend turns flat in 15~40m away from the road and even become less-sensitive about the highway influence, this may due to the effects of soil surface mulching as well as highway construction. B. Impacts of highway construction At the time of Qinghai-Tibet highway construction, people’s innocence of protecting permafrost leads to serious phenomenon of cutting excavation and earth collecting during the construction and maintenance. Thus, along with the vulnerable environmental rehabilitation of the Tibetan Plateau, all result in the destruction of permafrost. In line WL, 15~30m away from the roadbed, the GPR reflectors of the permafrost are discontinuous and have low resolution, but reflecting events of the seasonal frozen soil sub-interface have the opposite effect. Surface investigation shows that here is a fixed soil collection area for project construction in the early years, and it is the raised water content caused by these surface damages that lead to the strong reflection of seasonal frozen soil layers in GPR profiles (Fig. 4, blue circle). And yet, permafrost degenerates with the impact of the surface and discontinuous generates in the interface. In addition, telecommunication line construction also makes the same effect and all of these reasons above caused the degradation of permafrost. V.  CONCLUSION  GPR survey is a high-resolution technique in Tibet plateau frozen soil exploration and distinguishes the boundary between seasonal frozen soil and permafrost. The change of frozen ground and its internal microstructure can also be obtained to investigate the origin of frozen soil in this region. This study provides a reference to the relationship between frozen soil study and engineering. Particularly, it has significant values in the high-evolution-region frozen ground engineering design, construction and maintenance in Tibet plateau. Furthermore, the valuable information from GPR exploration plays the key role in the future frozen soil engineering design, environmental protection and critical engineering security operation The results of GPR section show that all kinds of primary frozen soil projects have significant effects on the permafrost  in Tibet plateau, which cause the melting of permafrost and thickening the seasonal frozen soil around the roadbed. As a result, the surface moisture content is increasing and then leads to the subgrade failure. A greater damage happens on the sunny side of the roadbed owing to the higher increasing of water content. Surveys show that 30~40% road sections in China’s permafrost region since 2000, and half of them are the result of permafrost degradation and environmental changes caused by climate change. Combining the results of radar sections with geological sur vey in this area demonstrates that the engineering construction has a seriously destructive effect on permafrost in addition to the impacts from projects themselves. Specifically, the excavat ion construction and digging soil can cause the downward infil tration of surface water, which then lead to the permafrost mel ting damage. Besides that, the influence of the engineering con struction in permafrost area can be observed from the GPR sec tions.  Acknowledgment We would like to gratefully acknowledges funding from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (41133064), and also thank the support of the Cold and Arid Regions Environmental and Engineering Research Institute of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.  References [1]  [2] [3] [4]  [5]  [6] [7]  Zhang, T., R. G. Barry, K. Knowles, et al. Statistics and characteristics of permafrost and ground-ice distribution in the Northern Hemisphere, Polar Geogr, 1999, 23: 132-154. I.S. Nelson, F. E., O. A. Anisimov, and N. I. Shiklomanov. Subsidence risk from thawingpermafrost, Nature, 2001, 410, 889–890 Zhou Youwu, Guo Dongxin, Geocryology in China,Beijing:Science Press, 2000. Wang shaoling, Mi Haizhen,”The change of permafrost under roadbed with aphalt pavement along the Qinghai-Tibet highway,” Journal Of Clacilogy And Geocryology,1993, 15(4):566~573. Boqing Wu, Yongzhi Liu,”Advance research on frozen engineering permafrost region along qinghai-xizang plateu highway,” Journal Of Engineering Geology ,2002,10(1). Zhang Jinzhao, Huo Ming, highway roadbed stability technical problems and countermeasures in permafrost area, People's Transport Press，2008. Tong, C. J., and Q. B. Wu. The effect of climate warming on the Qinghai-Tibet Highway, Cold Reg. Sci.Technol., 1996, 24:101–106.  