Schennen
The potential of common-offset GPR surveying in complex permafrost environments: an example from Northern Siberia
2015
IEEE

The potential of common-offset GPR surveying in complex permafrost environments: an example from Northern Siberia Stephan Schennen, Jens Tronicke  I. I NTRODUCTION Permafrost environments cover approximately 24 % of the exposed land surface on the northern hemisphere [1] and exhibit temperatures below 0 °C for at least two consecutive years. Often, the investigation of such environments relies on point data which are typically limited due to the availability of boreholes or outcrops. Here, near-surface geophysical tools including ground-penetrating radar (GPR) can fill the inherent gap between resolution and coverage. Under benefitting site conditions, GPR provides the highest resolution of all geophysical methods and is favored due to the electrically high resistive character of frozen ground (e.g., [2]). However, weak attenuation of electromagnetic energy might also facilitate recording of out-of plain reflections and diffractions resulting in intricate GPR data sets, which might be a challenge for 2D and 3D data processing and interpretation. In the past, GPR has been succesfully employed in permafrost studies, for example, to examine the thickness of the active-layer [3], to image specific periglacial morphologies [4], [5], and to delineate ground ice bodies or ice layers [6], [7], [8] as well as ice wedges [9], [10]. These typical subsurface feature of perennially frozen ground result from persistently repeated thaw-freeze cycles in the uppermost decimeters of the subsurface and form steep dipping interfaces. Thus, ice wedges constitute challenging geometries for typical GPR acquisition configurations such as common-offset profiling. In this study,  ˚E 120  ˚E 160  N e w S i b e r i a n A r c h i p e l a g o  L D e n e l t a a  L a p t e v S e a  s t E a a n e r i S i b a S e  N  70˚  70˚  e  n  a  N  L  Abstract—Permafrost environments provide typically favorable conditions for GPR reflection imaging. The subsurface architecture of this perennially frozen ground comprises unique and complex subsurface structures such as ice wedges. These features represent challenging targets for 2D and 3D common offset surveying strategies. Here, we evaluate the potential of GPR to image complex permafrost environments in Northern Siberia using synthetic and field data examples. We use a realistic 2D synthetic model derived from an outcrop photograph to investigate the potential of common-offset data to image typical structures related to ice wedges and sedimentary layers. This synthetic study illustrates that a thorough surveying and processing strategy including a proper data migration is essential to derive a meaningful subsurface model. These findings are found to be extremely useful to process and interpret a 3D data set recorded on our field site located on the New Siberian Archipelago. Here, after careful processing we are able to identify and image cryostratigraphic interfaces between and below massive ice wedges.  140˚E  Institut für Erd- und Umweltwissenschaften, Universität Potsdam Potsdam, Germany  Fig. 1. Location of survey site (red marker) on the New Siberian Archipelago.  we focus on the ability of common-offset GPR surveys to image subsurface architecture in such permafrost environments. Here, the combined focus on ice wedge locations and major lithological subsurface structures at depth larger 10 m constitutes the main difference to previous mentioned studies, that focus typically on targets at depths <5 m using nominal antenna center frequencies >200 MHz. Our survey site is located on the New Siberian Archipelago in northern East Siberia (Fig. 1). The location has been studied intensively in the past (e.g., [11], [12], [13]) to reconstruct palaeoenvironmental conditions or to estimate the response of this environment to arctic warming. The subsurface is typically characterized by ice-oversatured, loesslike deposits and the occurrence of large ice wedges (up to ~17 m in vertical and ~5 m in horizontal extend), which are exposed in a nearby outcrop of >15 m height. Additionally, borehole data provide excellent ground-truthing for target horizons. First, we present a 2D synthetic data set, which is based on a synthetic model comprising structural features found in our surveying area. By analyzing the synthetic data resulting from this model, we investigate the potential of common-offset surveying strategies. Subsequently, we present field data acquired across our survey site on the New Siberian Archipelago. Considering the results from our synthetic study, we discuss our acquisition and processing strategy and present selected results, which are used to evaluate the potential of GPR surveying in northern East Siberia.  978-1-4799-6495-6/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE  0.125  0.13  0.135  0.14  v [m/ns] 0.145  0.15  0.155  0.16  0.165  z [m]  2 4 6 8 0  ~2m  a  20 40 t [ns]  Fig. 2. Photograph of an outcrop close to our survey location [14]. It comprises an ice wedge (on the right), intersecting subhorizontal sedimentary layers. The picture was used to design our synthetic model shown in Fig. 3.  60 80  II. S YNTHETIC DATA  b  0 20 40 t [ns]  Fig. 2 shows a photograph of an outcrop illustrating a typical subsurface setting in northern East Siberia [14]. Based on the structures visible in the photograph, we design a subsurface model representing a profile across three ice wedges intersecting with subhorizontal sedimentary layers. In Fig. 3a, we show our 2D synthetic model in terms of GPR velocity. These vary between 0.13 m ns 1 and 0.15 m ns 1 in the model areas representing sedimentary deposits, whereas massive ice wedges are associated with velocities up to 0.17 m ns 1 . To simulate realistic settings and data, we add spatially correlated stochastic noise to each of the units. The resulting velocity model (Fig. 3a) is passed to GPRmax [15], to simulate synthetic 2D GPR data using this finite-difference-time-domain modeling tool. Here, we focus on a synthetic 200 MHz data set recorded with a fixed antenna offset of 1 m along a 20 m long profile. Fig. 3b shows our synthetic data after applying a t²amplitude scaling for visualization. The presented data exhibit clear reflections from most of the major subhorizontal interfaces and large-scale diffraction hyperbolas, which originate from the complex structures related to the three ice wedges. Furthermore, alternating levels of background noise provide a remarkable similarity to our later presented GPR field data, which is not the case for synthetic data based on simpler velocity models without stochastic noise (not shown). Although dealing with synthetic data, we apply a standard processing flow that comprises t0 -correction and bandpass filtering for consistency with subsequent processing of field data. Furthermore, we perform fk-filtering and apply a topographic migration following [16] using a constant velocity of 0.15 m ns 1 (Fig. 3c). When comparing this result with the input model (Fig. 3b), we notice that most of the diffracted energy is succesfully propagated back (e.g., the successfully collapsed diffraction hyperbola at x = 7 m, t = 65 ns) and prominent interfaces of the major lithological units are enhanced (e.g., between t = 40 ns and 70 ns). Furthermore, the location and the extend of ice wedge bodies can be estimated from our processing result. In contrast, complex and almost vertical  100  60 80 100 0  c 5  10 x [m]  15  20  Fig. 3. Synthetic data example. (a) Input model in terms of GPR velocity generated using structural information from an outcrop photography (Fig. 2), (b) synthetic common-offset 200 MHz data resulting from the model shown in (a), and (c) synthetic data set after applying a standard processing sequence including migration.  structures, such as concave shapeded ice wedge interfaces (e.g., around lateral distances of 12 m; Fig. 3a), can not be resolved with our synthetic data because of the generally limited angular illumination provided by common-offset data sets. Nevertheless, our synthetic data set shows that single offset 2D GPR data enable us to trace major subhorizontal interfaces (e.g., related to stratigraphic target horizons) despite a relatively complex subsurface in which diffractors represent a dominant feature. Of course, in real field settings the 3D nature of these structures has to be considered, and, thus, only 3D surveying strategies might give reliable results. III. F IELD DATA In spring 2014, we recorded a 3D GPR data set on a late Pleistocene ice complex in northern East Siberia (Fig. 1). For data acquisition, we used a Sensors & Software pulseEkko Pro GPR system, equipped with unshielded 100 MHz antennas. We employed a kinematic surveying strategy relying on a combination of our GPR system with a Leica TPS1200 selftracking total station. The survey covers an area of ~40 m (in inline direction) by ~25 m (in crossline direction) with  0 50 100  t [ns]  150 200 250 300 350 0  a x [m]  50 100  t [ns]  150 200 250 300 350  b  −40  −35  −30  −25  −20 x [m]  −15  −10  −5  0  Fig. 4. Processing result of topographic migration. (a) Unmigrated input data, (b) topographic migrated data using a velocity of 0.17 m ns 1 .  maximum topographic variations of up to ~4.6 m. The major slope of the area is ~6.5° superimposed by local topographic heights (up to ~1 m above their surroundings). A nearby scarp indicates that these local topographic features are associated with thermokarst mounds; i.e., sediment columns consisting of relictic polygonal fillings. Furthermore, the exposure shows that these thermokarst mounds are surrounded by massive ice wedges. Fig. 4a shows a 2D line extracted from our 3D data set after t0 -correction, DC removal and gridding the kinematically acquired data. For visualization, we applied additionally a t²-amplitude scaling and a topographic correction using a velocity of 0.17 m ns 1 . The data show a distinct pattern of diffraction hyperbolas comparable to our synthetic data (Fig. 3b). These features are typically bound to thermokarst mounds and exhibit a strong 3D character, as evaluation of adjacent profiles, timeslices, and the digital terrain model reveals. Thus, one should be aware of hyperbolas in the extracted 2D profile with an out-of-plain origin and, consequently, that GPR surveying at our field site demands a 3D data acquisition and processing strategy. At t >200 ns regions of high energy (e.g., around x = 22.5 m, t = 275 ns) and low energy (e.g., around x = 12.5 m, t = 275 ns) alternate, forming a pattern of reflections that exhibit a periodicity similar to the spacing of thermokarst mounds present at our field site. Finally, we apply fk-filtering and a topographic migration using a constant velocity of 0.17 m ns 1 (estimated from common midpoint data and diffracation analysis) to the data  shown in Fig. 4a. Fig. 4b shows a 2D profile extracted from the migrated data cube at the same position as the profile shown in Fig. 4a. When comparing Figs. 4a and 4b, we notice that the previously mentioned pattern of diffraction hyperbolas are succesfully collapsed. This demonstrates the successful migration of our data set despite topographic variations and the strong 3D character of subsurface features. Furthermore, the pattern of high and low energetic areas is enhanced resulting in a more structured image. For traveltimes <150 ns , we observe a pattern similar to what has been imaged in our synthetic study across a sequence of ice wedges. Below the elevated areas we observe subhorizontal layering, which is interrupted laterally by areas of low energy. In contrast to our synthetic example, reflections of the associated interfaces are not clearly visible. This might result from nearly vertical and/or undulating interfaces. At larger traveltimes, we observe blind areas, which are interpreted as ground ice as indicated by a nearby borehole. At t >200 ns , we observe that the applied 3D processing highlights horizontal reflectors and, therefore, the traceability of these features through the 3D data set. From these observations, we conclude that GPR is a capable tool to investigate the complex subsurface architecture at our field site. Although we are not able to directly image the ice wedges, these features are clearly indicated by lateral variation in reflected energy. Furthermore, we are able to image numerous horizontal to subhorizontal interfaces, which, in a detailed interpretation, can be used to generate a 3D cryostratigraphic model for our field site. IV. C ONCLUSION The structural inventory of permafrost environments constitutes challenging geometries for typical GPR acquisition configurations such as common-offset profiling. Here, we investigated the potential of GPR in such environments using synthetic and field data examples. Our results demonstrate that we are able to identify and trace major lithological horizons. In addition, we can also expect that GPR is capable to provide information regarding the location and extend of ice wedges. In field applications, a thorough 3D surveying and processing strategy (including topographic migration) seems to be indispensable to extract reliable structural information from GPR data. However, for directly imaging steep, near-vertical structures (such as edges of ice wedges) more laborious multioffset strategies might be also considered. ACKNOWLEDGMENT We thank Niklas Allroggen (Universität Potsdam), Lutz Schirrmeister, and Georg Schwamborn (both Helmholtz Zentrum Alfred Wegener Institut Potsdam) for their support during field work, discussions and valuable background informations. We thank Marko Dubnitzki (Universität Potsdam) and Waldemar Schneider (Helmholtz Zentrum Alfred Wegener Institut Potsdam) for technical and logistical support. Furthermore, we acknowledge the German Federal Ministery of Education and Research (BMBF) for funding the CARBOPERM project (03G0836J).  R EFERENCES [1] T. Zhang, R. Barry, K. Knowles, F. Ling, and R. Armstrong, “Distribution of seasonally and perennially frozen ground in the northern hemisphere,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Permafrost, vol. 2. AA Balkema Publishers, 2003, pp. 1289–1294. [2] H. M. Jol, Ed., Ground Penetrating Radar Theory and Applications. Elsevier Science, 2009. [3] S. A. Arcone, D. E. Lawson, A. J. Delaney, J. C. Strasser, and J. D. Strasser, “Ground-penetrating radar reflection profiling of groundwater and bedrock in an area of discontinuous permafrost,” Geophysics, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1573–1584, 1998. [4] J. Doolittle, M. Hardisky, and S. Black, “A ground-penetrating radar study of Goodream palsas, Newfoundland, Canada,” Arctic Alpine Res., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 173–178, 1992. [5] B. J. Moorman, S. D. Robinson, and M. M. Burgess, “Imaging periglacial conditions with ground-penetrating radar,” Permafrost Periglacial Process., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 319–329, Oct. 2003. [6] K. Yoshikawa, C. Leuschen, A. Ikeda, K. Harada, P. Gogineni, P. Hoekstra, L. Hinzman, Y. Sawada, and N. Matsuoka, “Comparison of geophysical investigations for detection of massive ground ice (pingo ice),” J. Geophys. Res., vol. 111, no. E6, p. E06S19, 2006. [7] G. P. De Pascale, W. H. Pollard, and K. K. Williams, “Geophysical mapping of ground ice using a combination of capacitive coupled resistivity and ground-penetrating radar, Northwest Territories, Canada,” J. Geophys. Res., vol. 113, no. F2, p. F02S90, Apr. 2008. [8] G. Schwamborn, D. Wagner, and H. Hubberten, “The use of GPR to detect active layers in young periglacial terrain of Livingston Island, Maritime Antarctica,” J. Geophys. Res., pp. 327–332, 2008. [9] J. S. Munroe, J. A. Doolittle, M. Z. Kanevskiy, K. M. Hinkel, F. E. Nelson, B. M. Jones, Y. Shur, and J. M. Kimble, “Application of groundpenetrating radar imagery for three-dimensional visualisation of nearsurface structures in ice-rich permafrost, barrow, alaska,” Permafrost Periglacial Process., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 309–321, 2007. [10] T. Watanabe, N. Matsuoka, and H. H. Christiansen, “Ice- and Soil-Wedge Dynamics in the Kapp Linné Area, Svalbard, Investigated by Twoand Three-Dimensional GPR and Ground Thermal and Acceleration Regimes,” Permafrost Periglacial Process., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 39–55, 2013. [11] A. Andreev, G. Grosse, L. Schirrmeister, S. Kuzmina, E. Novenko, A. Bobrov, P. Tarasov, B. Ilyashuk, T. Kuznetsova, M. Krbetschek, H. Meyer, and V. Kunitsky, “Late Saalian and Eemian palaeoenvironmental history of the Bol’shoy Lyakhovsky Island (Laptev Sea region, Arctic Siberia),” Boreas, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 319–348, 2004. [12] L. Schirrmeister, G. Grosse, S. Wetterich, P. P. Overduin, J. Strauss, E. a. G. Schuur, and H.-W. Hubberten, “Fossil organic matter characteristics in permafrost deposits of the northeast Siberian Arctic,” J. Geophys. Res., vol. 116, p. G00M02, 2011. [13] S. Wetterich, V. Tumskoy, N. Rudaya, A. a. Andreev, T. Opel, H. Meyer, L. Schirrmeister, and M. Hüls, “Ice Complex formation in arctic East Siberia during the MIS3 Interstadial,” Quat. Sci. Rev., vol. 84, pp. 39–55, 2014. [14] J. Boike, D. Y. Bolshiyanov, L. Schirrmeister, and S. Wetterich, Eds., Russian-German cooperation SYSTEM LAPTEV SEA: the expedition Lena - new Siberian islands 2007 during the International Polar Year 2007/2008. Bremerhaven: Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research, 2008, vol. 584. [15] A. Giannopoulos, “Modeling of ground penetrating radar by GprMax,” Constr. Build. Mater., vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 755–762, 2005. [16] N. Allroggen, J. Tronicke, M. Delock, and U. Böniger, “Topographic migration of 2d and 3d ground-penetrating radar data considering variable velocities,” Near Surf. Geophys., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 253–259, 2015.  