Pupatenko
Transportation Geotechnics and Geoecology, TGG 2017, 17-19 May 2017
2017
Lithological Profiling of Rocky Slopes Using GeoReader Software Based on the Results of Ground Penetrating Radar Method

Lithological Profiling of Rocky Slopes Using GeoReader Software Based on the Results of Ground Penetrating Radar Method
The paper presents the Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) technique for the survey of deforming rocky slopes of the railway subgrades. The developed software GeoReader allows the delineation of the boundaries in soils, which compose the slope, and definition of the possible slip surface. We have summarized the results of the use of the technique in certain sections of the Far Eastern Railway.  
The current level of development in the sphere of geo-survey does not allow for the complete abandonment of costly and labor-intensive conventional survey techniques, such as boring. Nevertheless, in the near future geophysical methods will be able to provide complete information on the object of investigation.
Keywords: ground penetrating radar, common-offset reflection survey, common-midpoint method, subgrade;

Introduction

Large amounts of work on the reconstruction of operation lines are being conducted in the Eastern polygon of the railways of Russia. Among others, reconstruction resolves the tasks of extending the station tracks, laying second tracks and increasing curve radiuses. These jobs involve widening of the subgrade, displacing the center line of the track and determining the design parameters that will ensure the stability of the newly formed slopes. High quality engineering geological survey results are crucial for laying out such jobs. 
Unfortunately, the performance of high quality survey jobs on an operating railway track is very complicated. Some sections do not have a developed motor-road network which sometimes makes delivery of the equipment and machinery to the work site impossible and, consequently makes implementation of the work tasks impossible also.       
The ground penetrating radar survey offers the possibility of solving some of the problems, emerging in the process of the survey. Portability, high speed and low labor cost are the main advantages of the geophysical methods in comparison with the traditional geological-engineering survey methods. In our view, geophysical methods do not cancel traditional ones, but complement them and allow specialists to provide a higher quality of results. 
Ground penetrating radar (GPR) is a geophysical method for the non-destructive detection of ground layers by electromagnetic waves. GPR measures the two-way travel-time of the reflected electromagnetic wave propagating through the ground layers. The thickness of these layers is estimated after the determination of the EM velocity, V, propagation which, in turn, is controlled by the relative dielectric permittivity εr [1]:
where c is the EM velocity in vacuum, 0.3 m/ns.

GPR has been proved to be an effective non-destructive tool for solving a variety of engineering tasks [1]. The benefits of the method include development of a continuous GPR section, high efficiency and low cost. However, the complexity of the processing of the results is dependent on the experience of the engineer, which may significantly reduce the accuracy.
Materials and methods
There are very few papers dedicated to the use of the ground penetration radar method in the survey of unstable rock slopes. The theoretical basis of the GPR method from the point of view of resolving this task was given in the work of T. Toshioka [2]. Research [3] conducted within the frameworks of the research project "Landslide Hazard Assessment and Cultural Heritage", describes the employment of the GPR method when monitoring landslides in Austria. The paper [4] is devoted to GPR surveying of road failures as they relate to filling slope stability (using in particular a three-dimensional survey method). This paper describes ground penetrating radar method as an efficient, non-destructive and cost effective tool in characterizing the nature of slope stability problems as they relate to road construction. The work of British scientists [5] gives an example of using GPR methods for studying the influence of badger setts on the stability of slopes prone to landslide. The research paper [6] gives a theoretical basis for forecasting landslide deformation based on the interpretation of the amplitude-frequency characteristics of the returned GPR signal. 
The practice of employing LOZA GPR units produces good results under very different conditions [7, 8]. Antennae with a carrier signal frequency of 100-150 МHz are used under common conditions. In order to increase the depth of the cross-section, the radar is equipped with antennae with frequencies of 25 and 50 МHz. We used the LOZA-N GPR unit with a 3.0 meter long 50 MHz antennae. The time-base was 1024 ns and the sampling frequency was 1 GHz. The antennae are not cable-connected which allows the performance of GPR measurement to determine the velocity of wave propagation in ground layers.   
The research described in the paper is based on the results obtained by the research workers of the Far Eastern State Transport University [9, 10, 11].
Two groups of profiles are assigned and performed on the research object. The cross-sectional profiles are assigned from the base of the slope upwards. They are usually used to determine the possible slip surface on deforming or potentially dangerous slopes. The longitudinal profile is assigned along the slope or along the axis of the existing railroad. These profiles are essential for detecting the delineation of a landslide ground massif and correcting the boundaries detected on cross-sectional profiles. Combining the results of processing the cross-sectional and longitudinal profiles allows us to obtain a 3-D object model.
Theory
Unstable rock slopes have a well-marked sandwich layer structure. The upper layer consists of a mixture of rocky ground with loamy or sandy aggregate. The slip surface is, as a rule, water saturated, and goes along the loose ground interlayers.  The lower layer may have an undisturbed structure. Layer geometries may be random and, frequently, very complicated. The strength, deformative (and velocity) properties of each layer differ significantly.   
Thus, the model of a deforming rock slope is represented by a stratified medium with significantly differentiated velocity properties of adjacent layers. Such a model can be applied to calculate the ground facilities of a transport infrastructure on a stable or loose base, under the conditions of spread permafrost and buried/ground ice  [7], and extended structures crossing water areas, rivers and lakes [12, 13].
We have developed a methodology for transforming source GPR data into the depth sections. The central idea of this methodology lies in using the multi-offset measurement to calculate the propagation of electromagnetic waves in each layer. The results of transformation serve as a basis for the transformation of the source reflection-time section into the depth section. 
When carrying out full-scale field investigations, field tests are performed in such variants as the common midpoint (CMP) or wide angle refraction and reflection mode (WARR) technique. According to this technique, the distance between the antennae increases from 0 to a maximum value (usually up to 10 meters). At each point of measurement an electromagnetic impulse is generated and then a signal is registered at the receiving antenna. 
The time-distance curves of reflected waves are detected on the radargram. The velocity estimation from the multi-offset the GPR dataset is based on a hyperbolic assumption, where the reflecting interface is horizontally layered and the medium is homogeneous [14]. The relationship between the reflected wave time t, the antenna offset x and rms velocity Vrms is given for each horizon time by:
The required interval velocity in the layer can be calculated by Dix’s equation [15]:
where Vrms,i and Vrms,(i-1) are the rms velocities at the layer boundaries i and i-1, respectively; and t0,i and t0,(i-1) are the horizon times at these layer boundaries.

The depth of the n-th boundary layer can be computed as follows:
We have developed a GeoReader software for the practical employment of the described survey technique [16]. The software is written in Python 2.7 programming language using the Python(x,y) library for numerical calculations, analysis and data visualization (numpy, scipy, and matplotlib libraries tied with the graphics framework  PyQt were used).
The software implements a design procedure that calculates the velocities of propagation of electro-magnetic signals in stratified media, including those having inclines towards the boundary horizon. On the basis of the computed model, an engineer can delineate the boundaries of the ground layers and transform the time section into a depth section.
The software contains the following major algorithms for processing radargrams:
•	Compensation of attenuation along traces; vertical and horizontal normalization of amplitudes;
•	Spectral analysis (including constructing/plotting and analyzing spectrograms and periodograms according to fixed signals);
•	Distinguishing of the statistical parameters of traces;
•	High-frequency and low-frequency signal filtering;
•	Hilbert transform, plotting a signal envelope curve;
•	Topographic correction (Fig. 1, a) and compiling the results of processing the coordinates of the boundaries of ground layers (Fig. 1, b) for cross-sectional and longitudinal (Fig. 2) profiles.
The obtained coordinate data for all assigned borders of layers in the object under research is important information that allows us to determine the possible  positioning of a single or several  displacement surfaces.

Results
The coordinates of the boundaries have been obtained. Velocity parameters for each delineated layer have been transformed according to given dependencies into strength and deformation parameters. The detailed results of the geo-survey of one of the landslide sections of the Far Eastern Railway are described in [8]. Fig. 3 shows an example of the processing results. The geometry of the ground layers in the landslide massif is complicated. No less complicated is the task of delineating a possible slip surface in the slope. It should be taken into consideration that slip surfaces may be numerous lying at different depths from the slope surface. Additional information obtained in the course of the survey helps the analysis of the results.
The results analysis took into consideration additional information (Fig. 3) about the crack extension in the upper part of the slope.  
The configuration of the crack allowed us to choose only one slip surface out of all possible slip surfaces. The appearance of this crack is shown in (Fig. 4). As the slip surface goes from the bottom of the crack we were able to trace its exit onto the foot of the slope. The information on the upper boundary of the water saturated grounds is also of use. Information on the interlayers above the slip surface will have a lesser impact on the computation of stability.
Discussion
As a result of the conducted survey specialists gain an opportunity to generate design diagrams of an object. The demands of design organization and its survey specialists in structural calculations of the earth roadbeds depend on the personal experience and qualification of executive specialists and on the requirements set forth by the employer. Up-to-date software programs intended for calculating the stability of landslide slopes face the problem of the adequacy of the design solution. This problem is rooted not in the complexity of the design diagrams and computational resource requirements but in compliance with the real operation condition of an object under survey. 
Conclusions
The described results allow us to formulate a conclusion that the examination of important and crucial objects of the transport infrastructure is a long-term and costly process.  Significant results can be obtained only through the use of all survey techniques available to a designer.   The current level of development in the sphere of geo-survey does not allow for the complete abandonment of costly and labor-intensive conventional survey techniques, such as boring.  Nevertheless, in the near future geophysical methods will be able to provide complete information on the object of investigation. It is a matter of time and the speed of development of geophysical survey techniques. 

Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by funding from the Foundation for Assistance to Small Innovative Enterprises («Фонд содействия развитию малых форм предприятий в научно-технической сфере») under contract 7898ГУ2015.
The research was carried out on slope deformation sites of the motor-road “Lena” (Bolshoi Never – Yakutsk), and on the infrastructure facilities of the Far Eastern railway Komsomol’sk-on-Amur within the frameworks of engineering survey agreements. The authors express their gratitude to the graduates of the Far Eastern State Transport University (Khabarovsk) for their assistance in the organization of field experiments. 

Fig. 1. The source radargram (a) and corresponding radargram (b), geo-referenced (with the topographic survey correction carried out) for cross-sectional profile.
Fig. 2. Radargram of longitudinal profile with geo-referenced topographical survey correction.
Fig. 3. Results of radargram processing:  transverse profile with delineating boundaries between heterogeneous ground layers on a deforming rocky slope (beginning of frost retreat in spring)
Fig.4 Photographs of the crack in the upper part of the slope at the moment of its emergence and during its examining with GPR.

References
[1]	D.J. Daniels, Ground Penetrating Radar, the Institution of Electrical Engineers, London, 2009
[2]	T. Toshioka, T. Tsuchida, K. Sasahara, Application of GPR to detecting and mapping cracks in rock slopes, Journal of Applied Geophysics, 33 (1995) 119–124
[3]	K.-H. Roch, W. Chwatal, E. Brück,l Potentials of monitoring rock fall hazards by GPR: considering as example the results of Salzburg, Landslides, 3 (2006) 87–94, doi: 10.1007/s10346-005-0026-8
[4]	C. Ekes, P. Friele, Ground penetrating radar and its use in forest road stability analysis, Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR 2004), 639–642
[5]	D. Nichol, J.W. Lenham, J.M. Reynolds, Application of ground-penetrating radar to investigate the effects of badger setts on slope stability at St Asaph Bypass, North Wales, Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology, 36 (2003) 143–153
[6]	A.M. Kulizhnikov, R.A. Eremin, Surveying of landslide massifs of subgrade slopes by the ground penetrating radar method, 8th EAGE International Scientific and Practical Conference and Exhibition on Engineering and Mining Geophysics (2012) 54–64
[7]	G.M. Stoyanovich, V.V. Pupatenko, Y.A. Sukhobok, Detection of ground ice using ground penetrating radar method, Sciences in Cold and Arid Regions, 7(5) (2015) 541–546, doi: 10.3724/SP.J.1226.2015.00541
[8]	V.V. Pupatenko, G.P. Sokolov, G.M. Stoyanovich, Y.A. Sukhobok, GPR survey of rocky slopes [georadarnoe obsledovanie skal’nikh otkosov], Transportnaya Infrastruktura Sibirskogo Regiona, 1 (2015) 524–528
[9]	V.V. Pupatenko, Subgrade strength of narrow gauge railways under the influence of rolling stock (In the context of the Sakhalin Railway). Ph.D.Thesis, St.Petersburg State Transport University (1993)
[10]	Y.A. Sukhobok, Upgrading the Ground Penetrating Radar Survey Method for Transport Infrastructure Ground Objects, Ph.D. Thesis, Far Eastern State Transport University (2014)
[11]	E.S. Danilyants, Prognosis of stress-strain state subgrade with account of  vibro-impact dynamic load of railway train, Ph.D. Thesis, Far Eastern State Transport University (2009)
[12]	Y.A. Sukhobok, V.V. Pupatenko, G.M. Stoyanovich, Y.V. Ponomarchuk, Soil formation lithological profiling using ground penetrating radar, Procedia Engineering. Advances in Transportation Geotechnics 3. The 3rd International Conference on Transportation Geotechnics (ICTG 2016), 143 (2016) 1236–1243, doi: 10.1016/j.proeng.2016.06.110 
[13]	V.V. Pupatenko, Y.A. Sukhobok, Geophysical survey of infrastructure facilities [Geofizicheskoe obsledovanie ob’ektov infrastrukturi], Put’ i putevoe khozyaystvo, 4 (2013) 35–37
[14]	H. Liu, K. Takahashi, M. Sato, Measurement of dielectric permittivity and thickness of snow and ice on a brackish lagoon using GPR, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 7 (2014) 820–827, doi: 10.1109/JSTARS.2013.2266792
[15]	C.H. Dix, Seismic velocities from surface measurements, Geophysics, 20 (1955), 68–86
[16]	Y.A. Sukhobok, V.V. Pupatenko, The software for GPR survey processing [Programmniy kompleks dlya obrabotki rezul’tatov georadarnogo obslyedovaniya], Informacionnye tekhnologii i vysokoproizvoditelnye vychisleniya. The 3rd All-Russian Conference (2015) 177–180
