Stoyanovich
Sciences in Cold and Arid Regions
2015
Detection of ground ice using ground penetrating radar method

Detection of ground ice using ground penetrating radar method 
ABSTRACT The paper presents the results of a ground penetrating radar (GPR) application for the detection of ground ice. We combined a reflection traveltime curves analysis with a frequency spectrogram analysis. We found special anomalies at specific traces in the traveltime curves and ground boundaries analysis, and obtained a ground model for subsurface structure which allows the ground ice layer to be identified and delineated.
Keywords: ground penetrating radar; ground ice; common-offset reflection survey; wide angle reflection and refraction method  
1 Introduction 
In Russia, the Far Eastern Railway spans 5,990 km from Primorsky Krai at the Sea of Japan to Yakutia in eastern Siberia (Figure 1), and most of the subgrade sections of the Northern Latitudinal Branch of this railway are located in areas with permanently frozen soil. During construction and maintenance, it is necessary to save the fossil ground ice if it exists. Because the commonly recommended subgrade design techniques are not applicable in this case, a customized design is necessary. The cost of a customized subgrade design is higher, and the borders of such areas are roughly determined based on borehole spacing. The size of fossil ice lenses varies from several meters to hundreds of meters. The problem of precise detection of the fossil ice areas is critical because its solution strongly influences the cost and the project timeline.
Seismic methods (e.g., reflection and refraction methods, seismic tomography), electrical methods, and the ground penetrating radar (GPR) method are widely applied in subgrade formation evaluation. The ad-  vantages of GPR are its high productivity and low survey cost. A GPR survey, in conjunction with other geophysical methods, can also be applied to detect the boundaries between ground layers. The complex use of seismic methods, GPR, the borehole radar method (Kim et al., 2007), and capacitive-coupled resistivity (CCR) allows determination of the thickness, volume and internal structure of ground ice (Arcone, 2009; Hausmann and Behm, 2011; Godio and Rege, 2015), particularly in the Northwest Territories of Canada (Pascale et al., 2008; Odell et al., 2010; Angelopoulos et al., 2013). In Russia, GPR is used for delineation of ice lenses in Yakutia, Siberia, which is located about 450 km south of the Arctic Circle and has average winter temperatures of −30 °C (Velikin, 2008; Savvin et al., 2013).
The essential disadvantage of the GPR method is the complexity of processing its results, especially concerning the detection of ground ice in transport facility formations. Our objective was to develop a GPR method with which to detect the ground ice in subgrade formations and determine the thickness and location of ice lenses.
Figure 1 Sketch map of Far Eastern Railway. The arrow indicates location of the study site  
2 Materials and methods 
The railway embankment cross-section evaluation was carried out near a newly-built halt on the Northern Latitudinal Branch of the Far Eastern Railway (Figure 1). The depth of the embankment is nearly 3.5 m, formed by sandy medium-fine gravel with cobble. According to the geological engineering survey data, layers of icy sand clay, fossil ice, and icy medium-fine sand underlies the subgrade.
For this study, the boreholes were located at the axis of the subgrade, at 50-m spacing. The depth of each borehole was 7 m. The GPR survey was carried out along the cross section near one of the boreholes. We used the LOZA-N ("ЛОЗА-Н") GPR unit with 1.5-m-long, 100 MHz antennas. The time-base was 512 ns and the sampling frequency was 1 GHz. With this unit, the vertical resolution is equal to one-quarter of the signal wavelength. The last one is expressed as follows (Yilmaz, 2001; Brandt et al., 2009):  where c is the free space electromagnetic propagation velocity (0.3 m/ns), fc is the signal center frequency (GHz), and εr is the real part of the ice relative dielectric permeability. The horizontal resolution depends on the first Fresnel zone radius (Izyumov et al., 2008): where R is the penetrating depth (m).
According to Equation (1), the ice wavelength = 0.433 m and vertical resolution was approximately 11 cm. The approximate penetrating depth in our case was 5 m, hence the horizontal resolution equals to 75 cm.
A common-offset survey (with a fixed spacing between the antennas) was carried out along the cross section. The station interval was 50 cm. The obtained source radargram is shown in Figure 2.
The raw data were processed with zero time correction of arrival times in each trace and time-varying gain in order to compensate for the rapid signal attenuation. The obtained GPR profile was corrected for topography according to the data from the geodesic survey.
We also performed a multi-offset acquisition in wide-angle refraction and reflection mode (WARR) at the right-hand subgrade shoulder in order to estimate the vertical profile of the electromagnetic wave velocity and obtain a ground layers model. The distance between the antennas was increased in 10-cm increments while keeping the transmitter at a fixed position.
We applied an advanced technique for reflection traveltime curves analysis to process the radargram. The commonly recommended technique is based on the assumption that the ray path is linear. However, the ray deviates from the linear path as it passes from one ground layer to another. Neglecting this fact may lead to significant errors in the results.
Therefore, the following advanced technique was proposed by Pupatenko and Sukhobok (2013), which considers the ray path distortion. In this model, reflection traveltime curves do not have a hyperbolic form. The curve equation can be written in parametric form (Gurvich and Nomokonov, 1981): where n is the number of layers, Vi is the i-th layer electromagnetic propagation velocity (m/ns), hi is the i-th layer depth (m), and p is the ray parameter.
We proposed an iterative algorithm based on a step-by-step approach to the ground model characteristics {hi, Vi}. Equation (3) was solved numerically. The obtained curve was compared with the real reflection traveltime curve and the ground model was corrected.
The hyperbolic traveltime curves, which correspond to the waves reflected from the boundaries between the ground layers, were traced by detailed signal analysis of each trace. We found different trace anomalies, such as amplitude breaks, signal attenuation pattern changes, and break points which were not connected with the directed and refracted waves. Figure 3 presents the analysis of three typical traces.
Also, we calculated spectrograms for the signal in each trace. The spectrogram is an image of the frequencies in the time-varying GPR signal (Sergienko, 2002). The horizontal axis represents time, the vertical axis is frequency, and the color of each point represents the amplitude of a particular frequency at a time moment. The spectrograms were calculated from the raw traces using the short-time Fourier transform (STFT), which is defined as follows (Sergienko, 2002): where, F(τ,ω) is the signal spectrum, f(t) is the signal to be transformed, w(t) is the window function, τ is the time (ns), and ω is the circular signal frequency (GHz). As an example, the spectrograms which correspond to the traces in Figure 3 are shown in Figure 4.
Analysis of these spectrograms, which were calculated using the GPR traces from the WARR measurements, gave additional results. These results represented the indirect evidence that the ice layer existed. For example, analysis of the first spectrogram (Figure 3a) showed that the amplitudes of the signal when the frequencies were below 0.15 GHz increased sharply in the area of transition from icy sand clay to fossil ice. Furthermore, the signal amplitudes with frequencies from 0.2 GHz to 0.3 GHz decreased in the area of transition from fill soil to icy sand clay. These detected features are highlighted by rectangles in Figure 3. The analysis of the second spectrogram (Figure 3b) did not give such clear results, but we found some changes in signal frequencies corresponding to the ice layer.
Finally, we traced the correlation lines, which corresponded to the boundaries between the ground layers in the GPR cross-section profile, and then the top ice boundary was delineated.
In order to process the data we used the MATLAB-based MatGPR program (Tzanis, 2010) and a software system for radargram processing and ground model development. The program was created in the Railway Track and Railway Engineering Department of the Far Eastern State Transport University.
Figure 3 The representative GPR traces of the WARR radargram. The distance between the GPR antennas was (a) 1.3 m, (b) 3.7 m, (c) 8.0 m. The numbers indicate the ground layers: 1– fill soil, 2– icy sand clay, 3– fossil ice, 4– icy medium-fine sand, 5– frozen soil  
Figure 4 The spectograms for the traces shown in Figure 3. The distance between the GPR antennas was (a) 1.3 m, (b) 3.7 m. The numbers indicate the ground layers: 1– fill soil, 2– icy sand clay, 3– fossil ice, 4– icy medium-fine sand, 5– frozen soil. The rectangles represent the areas where amplitudes changes sharply at the specific frequency band  
3 Results and discussion 
During tracing and analysis of the traveltime curves, we obtained the ground model of the observed formation (Figure 5b). The results corresponded to the control borehole data, and the discrepancy did not exceed 9%. The fossil ice layer was detected. We transformed the reflection-time GPR section (Figure 2) to a depth section (Figure 6).
Traveltime curves analysis (Figure 5c) showed that the top and bottom ice boundaries were detected clearly. According to the traveltime curve, which corresponded to the wave reflected from the ice bottom boundary, we calculated the ice electromagnetic propagation velocity, 0.154 m/ns. This result agreed with previously published data, such as Arcone (2009), who found that the theoretical value of the ice electromagnetic propagation velocity is 0.150 m/ns. Hausmann and Behm (2011) considered the velocity range from 0.157 m/ns to 0.169 m/ns depending on the percentage of liquid water and calcite powder.
We did not find any additional criteria for distinction between reflections from the ice top (or bottom) boundary and reflection from other boundaries using only raw GPR traces. Therefore, it is recommended that standard GPR processing techniques be used, such as amplitude relation analysis (breaks detection), detecting the signal envelope changes, and tracing lines of correlation.
From this we could make inferences about the qualitative changes of the ground layers (fill soil – icy sand clay – ice – icy medium-fine sand) from the frequency changes in the spectrogram. It is fair to remark, however, that this technique gives only relative data because the absolute values of the frequencies are influenced by the GPR system type, transmission power, the type of the transmitter pulse, and the signal central frequency, besides the soil parameters.
The final result was a depth GPR section with ground layer boundaries. Inspection of this section showed that it was impossible to clearly separate the bottom boundary of ice from the underlying sand. However, the top boundary of ice was clearly separated from the overlying sand clay by a break. This was more likely related to the decrease of the signal propagation velocity when crossing from ice to sand (Figure 5b).
Figure 5 The results of ground modelling: (a) borehole log according to geological engineering survey data, (b) ground model obtained by traveltime curves analysis, (c) WARR measurement at the control section  
Figure 6 The depth GPR section along the cross-section profile. The numbers indicate the ground layers: 1– fill soil, 2– icy sand clay, 3– fossil ice and icy medium-fine sand, 4– frozen soil  
The research objective was accomplished. We determined the positions of the ice lenses in plan and the ice depth, and this information was sufficient to estimate the ground ice volume. A design engineer can use this information to allocate the length and position of subgrade constructions that would prevent the defrosting of ground ice during subgrade maintenance.
The importance of these obtained results is in the continuity of the GPR sections. It should be noted that the scope of the borehole work will be determined by the technical assignment. If there is no information about the existence of ground ice or the size of ice lenses, and if the ground ice is located between boreholes, specific engineering solutions may not be applied. The detection of ice lenses during construction, or the consequences of destruction of fossil ice during maintenance, would result in significant additional expenses.
4 Conclusions 
The research results can be summarized as follows: 
1) Using GPR, we could delineate the ice lenses and clearly detect the bottom boundary of the ice.
2) It was necessary to perform the GPR multi-offset acquisition in the wide-angle refraction and reflection mode (WARR) at some reference points in the field area. Then it was necessary to obtain the ground model, which corresponded to the drilling data, and to transform the time section to a depth section.
3) The most important parameter which defines the ice location is the signal propagation velocity. Here its value was calculated using the advanced technique of reflection traveltime curves analysis. The velocity should lie in the range between 0.150 and 0.169 m/ns.
4) The frequency analysis of spectrograms, which are based on the raw GPR traces, should be performed.
Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful to Prof. Alexander L. Isakov, Siberian State University of Railway Engineering, for the opportunity to prepare this work and to present this paper at the 2nd International Symposium on Transportation Soil Engineering in Cold Regions, in Novosibirsk, September 24–26, 2015. We would like to thank everyone who helped us during the surveys. In addition, the authors would like to show appreciation to Docent Yuliya V. Ponomarchuk and Docent Dmitry Y. Maleev for helping us to improve the quality of the paper.
References: 
Angelopoulos MC, Pollard WH, Couture NJ, 2013. The application of CCR and GPR to characterize ground ice conditions at Parsons Lake, Northwest Territories. Cold Regions Science and Technology, 85: 22–33. DOI: 10.1016/j.coldregions.2012.07.005.
Arcone SA, 2009. Snow and ice research with ground penetrating radar. In: Daniels DJ (ed.). Ground Penetrating Radar (2nd ed.).
London: The Institution of Electrical Engineers, pp. 439–454.
Brandt O, Taurisano A, Giannopoulos A, et al., 2009. What can GPR tell us about cryoconite holes? 3D FDTD modeling, excavation and field GPR data. Cold Regions Science and Technology, 55: 111–119. DOI: 10.1016/j.coldregions.2008.06.002.
Godio A, Rege RB, 2015. The mechanical properties of snow and ice of an alpine glacier inferred by integrating seismic and GPR methods. Journal of Applied Geophysics, 115: 92–99. DOI: 10.1016/j.jappgeo.2015.02.017.
Gurvich II, Nomokonov VP, 1981. The exploration seismology.
Geophysics Handbook [Seysmorazvedka. Spravochnik geofizika]. Moscow: Nedra, pp. 105–106.
Hausmann H, Behm M, 2011. Imaging the structure of cave ice by ground-penetrating radar. The Cryosphere, 5: 329–340. DOI: 10.5194/tc-5-329-2011.
Izyumov SV, Druchinin SV, Voznesensky AS, 2008. The Theory and Methods of Ground Penetrating Radar [Teoriya i metody georadiolokatsii]. Moscow: MSU Publishing House, pp. 9–58.
Kim JH, Park SG, Yi MJ, et al., 2007. Borehole radar investigations for locating ice ring formed by cryogenic condition in an underground cavern. Journal of Applied Geophysics, 62: 204– 214. DOI: 10.1016/j.jappgeo.2006.11.002.
Odell DE, Smith IR, Moorman BJ, 2010. Detection and characterization of massive ground ice using ground penetrating radar and seismic shothole methods. In: Proceedings, GEO2010, 63rd Canadian Geotechnical Conference & 6th Canadian Permafrost Conference, Calgary, Alberta: GEO2010 Calgary Organizing Committee, pp. 1284–1289.
Pascale GP, Pollard WH, Williams KK, 2008. Geophysical mapping of ground ice using a combination of capacitive coupled resistivity and ground-penetrating radar, Northwest Territories.
Journal of Geophysical Research, 113: F02S90. DOI: 10.1029/2006JF000585.
Pupatenko VV, Sukhobok YA, 2013. Lithological sectional layering using ground penetrating radar data. The World of Transport [Litologicheskoe raschlenenie razreza po dannym georadiolokatsii. Mir transporta], 3: 154–161.
Savvin DV, Nikiforova MR, Omelyanenko AV, et al., 2013. The results of experimental investigations of rock cryogenic condition using GPR method under conditions of open cut mining.
Mining Research Bulletin [Rezul'taty eksperimental'nykh issledovaniy kriogennogo sostoyaniya gornykh porod metodom georadiolokatsii v usloviyakh otkrytoy razrabotki mestorozhdeniy kriolitozony], 5: 192–196.
Sergienko AB, 2002. Digital signal processing [Tsifrovaya obrabotka signalov]. Saint Petersburg: Piter, pp. 249–312.
Tzanis A, 2010. MatGPR Release 2: A freeware MATLAB® package for the analysis and interpretation of common and single offset GPR data. Fast Times, 15(1): 17–43.
Velikin SA, 2008. The problems of using ground penetrating radar in cryolithic zone: Evidence from the research of engineering structure condition. Mineral Prospecting and Conservation of Mineral Resources [Voprosy primeneniya georadiolokatsii v kriolitozone na primere izucheniya sostoyaniya inzhenernykh sooruzheniy, Razvedka i okhrana nedr], 1: 28–31.
Yilmaz O, 2001. Seismic Data Analysis (2nd ed., Vol. 1). Tulsa, OK: Society of Exploration Geophysicists, pp. 25–150.