Tronicke
Toward automated delineation of ground-penetrating radar facies in clastic sediments: An example from stratified glaciofluvial deposits
2015
GEOPHYSICS, VOL. 80, NO. 4

Toward automated delineation of ground-penetrating radar facies in clastic sediments: An example from stratified glaciofluvial deposits
ABSTRACT 
Ground-penetrating radar (GPR) is an established geophysical method to explore near-surface sedimentary environments. Interpreting GPR images is largely based on manual procedures following concepts known as GPR facies analysis. We have developed a novel strategy to distinguish GPR facies in a largely automated and more objective manner. First, we calculate 13 textural attributes to quantify GPR reflection characteristics. Then, this database is reduced using principal component analysis. Finally, we image the dominating principal components using composite imaging and classify them using standard clustering methods. The potential of this workflow is evaluated using a 2D GPR field example collected across stratified glaciofluvial deposits. Our results demonstrate that the derived facies images are well correlated with the composition and the porosity of the sediments as known from independent borehole logs. Our analysis strategy eases and improves the interpretability of GPR data and will help in a variety of geologic and hydrological problems.

INTRODUCTION 
Ground-penetrating radar (GPR) is an established geophysical tool to explore near-surface sedimentary environments in 2D or 3D (Bristow and Jol, 2003). Especially in clastic sediments, GPR has been successfully used, for example, to reconstruct past depositional environments, to investigate the nature of sedimentary processes, to aid hydrogeological investigations, and to assist in hydrocarbonreservoir analog studies (Neal, 2004). Interpreting such GPR data relies on the basic assumption that, after appropriate data processing and considering the resolution capabilities of the data, the imaged reflection patterns and signal signatures are directly related to the buried geologic structure. Often, the interpretation of GPR data recorded across sedimentary deposits relies on concepts such as GPR facies analysis (e.g., van Overmeeren, 1998) that have been largely adopted from analyzing reflection seismic data. In this context, GPR facies (also termed radar facies) can be defined as sedimentary units composed of characteristic reflection patterns based on reflection amplitude, continuity, geometry, and/or internal configuration. Analyzing such characteristics allows different GPR facies to be distinguished, which then can be interpreted in terms of depositional processes, sedimentary environments, and lithofacies. Despite its wide use and success, this interpretation strategy is typically performed in a manual fashion making it laborious and rather inefficient especially for 3D data sets. In addition, such a subjective strategy bears the potential of inconsistency because the outcome depends on the expertise and experience of the interpreter. Addressing these limitations requires the development of novel, objective, and efficient GPR data analysis and interpretation flows.
Most recent attempts to improve the methodology of GPR data interpretation rely on attribute-based analysis approaches (e.g., McClymont et al., 2008; Forte et al., 2012; Tronicke and Böniger, 2013). Here, the term attribute refers to any measure calculated or extracted from the data that helps to enhance or quantify features of interpretation interest (Chopra and Marfurt, 2007). In reflection seismics, attributes based on texture analysis are known as promising measures to extract patterns of common signal characteristics (a recent review is given by Gao, 2011). Here, texture is defined by the spatial arrangement of neighboring amplitudes and is used to characterize the spatial variability of amplitudes. However, their applicability to GPR data is largely untapped and only a few applications have been reported in the literature. For example, McClymont et al. (2008) assess fault geometries and displacement rates and develop a depositional/structural model by combining coherency with textural attributes for GPR data acquired across fluvial deposits, whereas Tronicke and Böniger (2013) apply a similar workflow to GPR data collected across volcanic and lacustrine sediments. In addition, Forte et al. (2012) evaluate a variety of attributes, including textural ones, to characterize a carbonate reservoir analog. These authors also perform an ad hoc classification of different GPR attributes. Although these studies indicate that texture analysis of GPR data can be considered as a powerful tool, the full potential of such analyses, as needed for example, to automatically generate and systematically evaluate GPR facies models outlining the dominant reflection patterns, has yet not been investigated.
In this study, automated GPR facies delineation using a variety of textural attributes is investigated. After describing the methodological foundation of the proposed workflow, we apply it to 2D GPR field data collected at a well-constrained test site in Germany. The results of facies imaging and classification are presented, discussed, and evaluated also using independent borehole-based data.

METHODOLOGY 
The proposed strategy for automated attribute-based facies delineation and classification is basically a three-step procedure, which is comparable with similar problems addressed by reflection seismics (Coleou et al., 2003). In this strategy, after calculating and evaluating a variety of attributes, a set of appropriate attributes is selected and used for facies imaging and classification. Here, we focus on (1) 13 different textural attributes calculated from processed GPR data for characterizing reflection patterns, (2) principal component analysis (PCA) for reducing the dimensionality of our attribute data set, and (3) standard composite imaging and clustering techniques for facies imaging and classification, respectively. In the following, we provide more details regarding the individual steps of this workflow.

Textural attributes 
From an image-processing perspective, methods for texture analysis are tools to investigate image patterns composed of spatially organized entities that have characteristic brightness, color, shape, and size. Here, we use one of the most common methods for texture analysis, which is based on a statistical concept known as the graylevel co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) (Haralick et al., 1973). The GLCM measures how often different combinations of intensity (gray) values occur in an image, and its size is related to the number of intensity levels present in an image. To study texture variations in 2D GPR data, we follow common practice (e.g., Chopra and Marfurt, 2007; McClymont et al., 2008) and rescale the data to a limited number of gray levels (typically 16–64 levels are used). Then, for each sample point, the GLCM is calculated in a sliding-window procedure and normalized to approximate the probabilities of cooccurrences. To characterize the GLCM and to extract textural features as numeric expressions, different attributes are calculated from the GLCM. A variety of attributes has been proposed, which may be grouped into contrast measuring, regularity measuring, and statistical attributes (e.g., Eichkitz et al., 2015). In the geophysical literature, usually only a limited number of textural attributes (such as homogeneity or contrast) are calculated (e.g., Gao, 2011), which eases the subsequent interpretation. Here, to ensure maximum information content and because the usefulness of individual attributes regarding the analysis of GPR data is largely untapped, we calculate a set of 13 GLCM-based attributes, including contrast, correlation, cluster prominence, dissimilarity, energy, entropy, homogeneity, sum of entropy, difference entropy, two information measures of correlation, inverse difference normalized, and inverse difference moment normalized (Haralick et al., 1973; Soh and Tsatsoulis, 1999; Clausi, 2002).

Attribute selection 
Our attribute database consists, as previously defined, of 13 textural attributes. Interpreting and classifying such a database bear the potential of biased results due to redundant information; i.e., two or more variables (attributes) may contain similar or highly correlated information. A common statistical tool to analyze such a database is PCA, which has also been extensively used in earth-science data analysis (e.g., Davis, 2002). PCA can be considered as a technique for reducing the dimensionality of a data set, in which the basic idea is to minimize the correlation between n input variables by transforming them into a vector space with a new basis. The resulting n principal components (PCs) are uncorrelated (or less correlated) and ordered with decreasing variance; i.e., the first one represents the most dominant PC of the data set. Analyzing the variance explained by the individual PCs and setting a threshold value (typically 80%– 90% of the total variance) allows one to reduce the dimensionality of the data set, e.g., to use only the first two or three PCs for further analyses. Using this strategy, we analyze our attribute database and reduce it to a few, new PCA-based attributes that summarize most of the textural information contained in the original 13 GLCM-based attributes.

Composite imaging and classification 
To efficiently visualize and analyze a database consisting of a limited number of attributes (such as our PCA-based attribute database), visualization techniques known as color stacking or red-green-blue (RGB) blending have proven their usefulness. These approaches are well established in the remote sensing and digital image processing communities (e.g., Pohl and van Genderen, 1998) and have also been successfully used to analyze multiattribute geophysical data sets (e.g., Guo et al., 2008). Using the RGB color model, three colocated data sets can be combined into one pseudocolor image by assigning each data set to one of the color channels. Here, we use RGB blending to generate a composite image from our PCA-based attributes, which allows us to summarize the major textural characteristics present in our GPR data in a single image and to interpret it in terms of GPR facies.
As an alternative for visualization and a further step in interpretation, we can integrate our database using supervised or unsupervised classification techniques. Here, we use fuzzy c-means (FCM) cluster analysis (e.g., Hoeppner et al., 1999), which is a popular unsupervised classification tool that is also successfully used within the geosciences. The FCM technique is based on iteratively minimizing an objective function for a given number of clusters c and yields the optimum locations of the cluster centers and the degree of membership of the clustered data points to the c clusters. The fuzzy concept allows for partial memberships, which is useful to analyze and visualize the integrity of the solution. One fundamental drawback of all clustering techniques is the choice of the optimum number of clusters (Bezdek, 1981). Typically, this choice is guided by statistical criteria such as the normalized classification entropy (Roubens, 1982), careful analyses of the resolution of the input data, and comparing the obtained solutions with available a priori information. Here, following these guidelines, we use FCM cluster analysis to generate a classified facies model from our attribute data base after reducing its dimensionality by PCA.

FIELD DATA EXAMPLE
Our field example has been acquired at the Horstwalde test site, which is located approximately 30 km south of Berlin, Germany. The site was installed by the University of Potsdam in cooperation with the Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing and the Helmholtz Center for Environmental Research. As known from various boreholes, direct-push soundings, and geophysical surveys, a shallow groundwater table is located at a depth of approximately 2.75 m below the earth’s surface, and the local geology is characterized by layered, almost-horizontal sequences of mainly sand and gravel-dominated glaciofluvial material (Linder et al., 2010; Schmelzbach et al., 2011; Tronicke et al., 2012). In Figure 1, we characterize these sediments in more detail using selected borehole-based data. The gray log summarizes grain size data from sieve analysis and represents the coefficient of uniformity U ¼ d60 ∕d10, where d10 and d60 are the tenth and sixtieth percentile derived from cumulative grain-size distribution curves. The black curve represents porosity variations in the water-saturated zone, as derived from available vertical-radar profiling data (Tronicke and Hamann, 2014). Thus, these two logs represent independent borehole-based information, which is typically used to classify sedimentological and hydrological facies, respectively. Later, we will use these data to evaluate the success of GPR facies analysis.
We recorded our 2D GPR data (previously presented by Tronicke and Hamann, 2014) with a kinematic surveying strategy (Böniger and Tronicke, 2010) using 100-MHz antennas and a sampling interval of 0.2 ns. Data processing follows a standard sequence, including dewow and band-pass filtering, time-dependent amplitude scaling (to correct losses due to geometric spreading and absorption), and frequency-wavenumber filtering (to suppress steep events associated with the tails of diffraction hyperbolas caused by buried pipes and other near-surface scatterers located outside the surveyed profile). Finally, we migrate our data using a 2D Kirchhoff approach (as presented by Allrogen et al., 2015), enhance the spectral content using band-limited spectral blueing (Belina et al., 2009), and perform a time-to-depth conversion. For migration and time-to-depth conversion, we consider a 1D velocity model derived from vertical-radar profiling data (Tronicke and Hamann, 2014) capturing the major velocity variations associated with the groundwater table. This velocity model shows variations between approximately 0.13 m/ns for the unsaturated sediments and approximately 0.06 m/ns for the watersaturated sediments.
In Figure 2, we show the final processed GPR profile. We see that the subsurface architecture is characterized by horizontal to subhorizontal layering as expected from the available background information (including coring information, data from direct-push soundings, and a variety of geophysical experiments). For example, we observe continuous, high-amplitude reflections in the upper approximately 3 m mainly characterizing the unsaturated sediments above the groundwater table. In the saturated sediments (below a depth of approximately 3 m), vertical zonation is indicated by different reflection patterns (e.g., in terms of continuity and frequency content). To better quantify these observations, we calculate our set of textural attributes and analyze it by PCA. In Figure 3, we visualize the resulting first three PCs, which together explain more than 90% of the total variance of the attribute data set. Comparing these images with Figure 2 illustrates that the PCA-based attributes (summarizing the information from textural analysis) highlight the major structural units indicated in the processed data section. For example, the first PC (Figure 3a) mainly separates continuous, horizontal reflection elements characterized by rather low frequencies (found at depths <3.5 m) from less continuous, horizontal to subhorizontal events with generally higher frequency content (found at depths >3.5 m). The second and third PCs (Figure 3b and 3c) provide more details regarding textural variations. For example, at depths >3.5 m, the second PC separates areas characterized by rather high amplitude, continuous reflections (the red colors in Figure 3b) from those characterized by lower amplitudes and more discontinues reflection patterns (the blue colors in Figure 3b).
To integrate the information of the first three PCs (Figure 3a–3c), we generate a composite image using RGB blending. The result is shown in Figure 4a, where the red channel represents the first, the green the second, and the blue the third PC. For evaluating this texture-based GPR facies image, we use the grain size and porosity information available at a borehole location in the center of the profile (Figure 1). These two logs represent independent information, which is typically used to classify sedimentological and hydrological facies, respectively. Comparing the GPR facies image with these data logs (also shown as an overlay in Figure 4a) illustrates that the major color variations in the composite image correlate with variations in sediment composition and/or porosity. For example, at depths between approximately 6 and 8 m, the blue areas in our composite image are characterized by increased U and decreased porosity values compared with their surroundings. Thus, we can conclude that our composite image (Figure 4a) summarizes our attribute database and highlights major textural variations by color coding and, thus, it represents a texture-based facies image, which, for example, can be further interpreted in terms of sediment composition or hydrological properties.
To further analyze our reduced database (Figure 3a–3c) and to generate a labeled (classified) facies model, we perform an unsupervised classification using FCM clustering. The results of performing such a cluster analysis using the first three PCs as input data is illustrated in Figure 4b and 4c. Here, the membership information controls color saturation; i.e., high color saturations represent high membership values (and, thus, indicate high confidence that the corresponding data points belong to the corresponding cluster) and low color saturations indicate low membership values. We show the three- and six-cluster solutions because, when considering the above-outlined criteria for evaluating the number of clusters (e.g., statistical measures such as normalized classification entropy), we find no arguments to discard one of the shown models. Thus, both models represent possible solutions, and we interpret them as two alternative but also complementary scenarios.
The three-cluster model (Figure 4b) indicates a layered subsurface, which is characterized by three dominant facies units. The uppermost unit (cluster 3) extends up to depths of approximately 3.5 m, and a central unit (cluster 2) is found at depths between approximately 3.5 and 8 m. Underneath a transition zone (between depths of approximately 8 and 10 m), the lowermost unit (cluster 1) characterizes sediments at depths greater than approximately 10 m. This zonation is also indicated by the borehole-based information (coefficient of uniformity and porosity logs; Figure 1) shown as overlays in Figure 4b. For example, the central unit is characterized by increased U values (compared with the upper and lower unit) and decreased porosity values (compared with the lower unit). This major zonation can also be found in the six-cluster model (Figure 4c), where additional clusters provide more details regarding subsurface structures and facies distributions, respectively. This model is also largely consistent with the borehole data, and the outlined structures and units are comparable with the composite image in Figure 4a. For example, between depths of approximately 6 and 8 m cluster four outlines sediments characterized by increased U and decreased porosity values (compared with the surrounding facies classes) and is delineated by blue colors in the composite image. However, in the sixcluster solution, we also note several features that are at the limit or even beyond the resolution capabilities of our GPR data (e.g., around the borehole location between depths of approximately 9 and 10 m) and, thus, they should not be considered for a detailed interpretation. In conclusion, for our data example, facies classification based on textural characteristics of GPR data results in reasonable facies models (Figure 4b and 4c) largely consistent with independent borehole-based data. Considering the available background information, such labeled facies models may serve as a basis for generating subsurface property models as needed, for example, for a detailed lithological understanding or for modeling subsurface hydrological processes.

CONCLUSIONS 
We have investigated the feasibility of delineating GPR facies in an objective and largely automated manner. We proposed the use of an attribute-based workflow focused on the textural characteristics of 2D GPR reflection patterns and the analysis and integration of these characteristics using PCA, RGB blending, and fuzzy cluster analysis. Our results demonstrate that textural attributes are promising measures to delineate GPR facies in stratified clastic sediments and that our set of 13 GLCM-based attributes contains sufficient information to generate reasonable facies images and models, which, at our field site, are consistent with the general geologic settings and independent borehole-based data. Although our field example was recorded across stratified sediments characterized by nearly horizontal layering, we believe that the full strength of such attribute-based facies delineation is achieved in more complex sedimentological settings. However, further studies also evaluating other attributes (such as instantaneous attributes based on complex trace analysis) and evaluating field data collected across different sedimentary environments are needed to develop the full potential of the proposed workflow. In addition, a variety of statistical and classification tools might be considered for the steps of dimensionality reduction and classification. For example, supervised classification techniques might result in improved facies models, especially, at field sites where detailed background information is available.
Compared with the standard GPR interpretation procedure based on manually delineating GPR facies, our strategy is advantageous because the outcome depends not on the expertise and experience of the interpreter and, thus, subjectivity and inconsistency in facies interpretation are reduced. Furthermore, it is readily extendable to analyze 3D GPR data sets, in which a manual interpretation strategy is laborious and inefficient, especially for structurally complex environments. Thus, we believe that approaches for generating facies models in a consistent and largely automated manner are important to better use GPR data in a variety of sedimentological and hydrological problems.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank the two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions.

Figures 
Selected borehole data available at our field site to characterize the glaciofluvial sediments in terms of their composition and porosity. The coefficient of uniformity U ¼ d60 ∕d10 (gray line and axes) is derived by sieve analysis of available core material, whereas porosity values (black line and axes) are derived from vertical radar profiling data for depths below the groundwater table.
The GPR field example: processed 2D GPR profile recorded using 100-MHz antennas across glaciofluvial sediments at a test site in Germany. At a profile distance of 21 m, the borehole data shown in Figure 1 have been recorded.
Visualization of the first three PCs resulting from analyzing 13 textural attributes calculated from the GPR image shown in Figure 2. (a) PC 1, (b) PC 2, and (c) PC 3.
(a) GPR facies image generated by RGB blending of the PCs (Figure 3), where the red channel is PC 1, the green PC 2, and the blue PC 3. (b and c) GPR facies models generated by analyzing the PCs (Figure 3) by FCM cluster analysis considering three and six clusters, respectively. In panels (a-c), the transparent rectangle at a profile distance of 21 m indicates the position of a borehole where we plot the coefficient of uniformity U (gray curve) and porosity (black curve) as overlays. For scaling and absolute values of these curves, we refer to Figure 1.
