Varela-González
A semi-automatic processing and visualisation tool for ground-penetrating radar pavement thickness data
2014
Automation in Construction 45 (2014) 42–49  

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect  Automation in Construction journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/autcon  A semi-automatic processing and visualisation tool for ground-penetrating radar pavement thickness data María Varela-González a, Mercedes Solla b,⁎, Joaquín Martínez-Sánchez a, Pedro Arias a a b  Department of Natural Resources & Environmental Engineering, University of Vigo, School of Mining Engineering, Maxwell s/n, 36310 Vigo, Spain Defense University Center, Spanish Naval Academy, Plaza de España 2, 36920, Marin, Spain  a r t i c l e  i n f o  Article history: Received 26 August 2013 Revised 4 February 2014 Accepted 2 May 2014 Available online xxxx Keywords: Ground-penetrating radar Pavement Civil engineering Processing Visualisation  a b s t r a c t Ground-penetrating radar (GPR) is a recommendable and cost-effective non-destructive technique for measuring the thickness of pavement layers because data acquisition can take place at normal trafﬁc speeds. On the other hand, the large amount of data collected is difﬁcult to process. Given that processing is conducted by qualiﬁed practitioners, it is a key to obtain software tools that allow for accurate thickness measurements and fast processing times. This paper presents a new semi-automatic program for the processing and visualisation of GPR data to measure pavement thicknesses. The results showed that an optimisation in the execution time allowed for a near-immediate response in data processing even when dealing with large data sets. Different data set lengths, ranging from 100 m to 20 km, were analysed, and the processing times required to complete the entire process were examined taking into account three different hardware conﬁgurations (i3, i5 and i7 processors). In all cases, the processing times did not exceed 30 s. An additional test was performed to evaluate the reproducibility of the algorithm on a well-deﬁned and preconditioned concrete asphalt course. Furthermore, the visualisation application allows for the georeferencing of the ﬁeld GPR data by using additional GPS data. © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.  1. Introduction The preservation and maintenance of transportation infrastructure is a global concern that affects social and economic development in all countries. The pavement is an essential part of the road that directly contributes to improving safety and vehicle comfort and reduces fuel consumption. The pavement life-cycle is not only affected by the number of heavy loads but also by the layer thickness, which is a vital factor deﬁning pavement quality. Thickness deﬁciencies reduce life-cycle, and periodical rehabilitation is therefore necessary in any country's road management program to maintain optimal road conditions of use or to monitor quality control on new asphalt overlays [1]. Pavement thickness has traditionally been determined by drilling and extracting cores, which is a considerably slow and expensive method that greatly damages the road structure. The use of non-destructive techniques (NDT) and near-surface remote sensing is now demanded for road subsurface inspection, such as pavement thickness estimation, which is important for reducing deterioration and for providing an accurate overall analysis in a relatively short time to reduce maintenance costs [1]. In this sense, ground-penetrating radar (GPR) is one of the most frequently recommended NDT methods for the measurement of pavement thickness [2–4]. GPR technology is rapid, cost effective, and allows ﬁeld surveys to be conducted without disturbing the pavement ⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +34 986 814052. E-mail address: merchisolla@uvigo.es (M. Solla).  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2014.05.004 0926-5805/© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.  structure and the normal trafﬁc ﬂow [5,6]. Thickness measurements using GPR are typically accurate to within ±10% [7]. In fact, some studies have shown that with proper ﬁeld methodologies and data processing techniques, thickness measurements of newly built pavement with layers thinner than 250 mm are typically accurate to within 73% with the use of GPR [8,9]. Due to the greater amount of high capacity roads built in Europe during the last decades, and the constant maintenance requirements for these roads, developing cost-effective inspection methods has therefore become a high priority to reduce economic infrastructure investments. In road inspections, the GPR systems are most commonly mounted on a moving vehicle [10,11], but the large amount of data collected makes it difﬁcult to process and manage in a reasonable amount of time. Currently, only some speciﬁc software are designed for this application, but most of them were developed from manufacturing companies of GPR devices, and they are not only expensive but also implement user interface designed for user who specializes in the GPR methods. This work aims to develop semi-automatic software for the processing and visualisation of GPR data to be used by any nonexperienced user to optimise the time and resources invested for road management and maintenance. An innovative approach is therefore presented in this work to provide a more powerful, functional and versatile tool, which is efﬁcient in terms of operability, to be applied in road inspections and, particularly, for thickness estimation. The software was developed to determine the thicknesses from GPR data collected by using either the core calibration or amplitude methodologies [12].  M. Varela-González et al. / Automation in Construction 45 (2014) 42–49  Exploiting the power of the C++ programming language and the Qt framework allows for the development of applications with graphical interfaces, which provides a simple and intuitive tool for a qualiﬁed worker, and thus was implemented to reduce the processing times and to give information at the earliest possible moment. To verify the optimisation process provided by the software developed, a test battery was performed for this tool using certain execution cases. For an exhaustive analysis, the software was evaluated by taking into account different hardware conﬁgurations. Furthermore, the software developed provides a visualisation application for the georeferencing of GPR data by using additional GPS (Global Positioning System) data. Both GPR and GPS data are therefore spatially related to a common trajectory, which allows for the integration of additional data generated from other sensors such as laser scanners, proﬁlometers or video cameras, all of which can be installed on a moving vehicle. Thus, by geopositioning, all the data acquired from different sensors can be accessed simultaneously for a particular geographic location, which has a clear application in road management systems [13–15]. 2. Materials and methods  43  velocity or core calibration [20] (for ground-coupled systems) and amplitude [21] (for air-coupled or launched systems). To do this, a library in C ++ has been built to be reused in future developments. To conduct the thickness measurements for ground-coupled systems, the longitudinal proﬁles corresponding to the reﬂections generated at the interfaces between different layers are extracted. With this procedure, the thickness is obtained for all the traces in the GPR proﬁle in terms of the wave travel-time distance between two different reﬂectors or layers. Knowing the propagation velocity of the radar-wave (v) and the travel-time distance (Δt) to and from the target, the thickness can be derived using Eq. (1): d¼v  Δt 2  ð1Þ  where the thickness is coincident with the distance travelled by the radar-wave (d). The calculation method explained above has been included to the library as reﬂected in Algorithm 1: Algorithm 1.  The main objective is to create an effective desktop application that provides, in a reasonable amount of time, a graphical depiction of the thicknesses obtained for the different layers that compose the pavement structure. In addition, another desktop application was created to display the obtained layer thicknesses in greater detail. 2.1. Technical description of the software To develop competitive software in comparison to other existing commercial tools, a series of initial requirements were established. The main requirement was the use of a powerful programming language that is capable of developing graphical user interface (GUI) applications with support for graph implementations. Graphs are needed to represent the traces obtained by the radar pulses and the ﬁnal layer thicknesses of the pavement. A review of available resources was carried out by taking into account the initial requirements and the C++ programming language along with the Qt libraries were selected as the most appropriate. C++ is a general purpose programming language created by Bjarne Stroustrup and designed for object oriented programming. C++ is, essentially, a superset of the C programming language. In addition to the resources provided by C, C++ provides ﬂexible and efﬁcient facilities for deﬁning new data types [16]. A complete library in the C ++ language was created for raw data processing. This library can be used in different programming environments even without any graphical interface. Qt is a multi-platform set of libraries for software development with a graphical user interface. It is released under the “GNU Lesser General Public License” and uses C++ language [17], which ensures the compatibility with our raw data processing library. There exists a library named Qwt, which is usable in Qt environments. This library contains GUI components and utility classes that enable the creation of spectrograms and curve plots [18], which are capable of building radargrams and proﬁles, respectively. Using the integrated Qt and Qwt libraries, two desktop applications were created: one for GPR data processing and another for results visualisation. The development environment consists of versions 4.8.0 of Qt and 5.2.2 of Qwt, and these were installed on the Qt Creator IDE. This environment was built making use of the MinGW compiler in 64 bits, which is an implementation of Linux GCC compilers that facilitate the migration to a Windows environment [19].  The same longitudinal proﬁles extracted in time can also be exported in terms of amplitudes, which are created by following the location of the maximum signal peaks thorough the entire GPR proﬁle. By knowing the amplitudes at the interfaces and the travel-time distances between reﬂections, it is possible to estimate the layer dielectric constants and thicknesses. The ﬁrst step in the process is determining the dielectric constants for each layer. The amplitude of the incident GPR signal and the amplitudes of the layer returns are necessary for the calculations (Eqs. (2) and (3)). In particular, the amplitude of the incident GPR signal is determined by collecting GPR data over a large ﬂat metal plate placed on the pavement surface either at the beginning or at the end of the GPR survey [22]. Because metal is a good conductor, it can be considered as a perfect reﬂector. 2 32 1 þ AA1 m5 εa ¼ 4 1− AA1  ð2Þ  m  where; εa A1 Am  dielectric constant of the ﬁrst layer amplitude of the reﬂection from the surface amplitude of the reﬂection from a large metal plate.  2 32  2 A1 A2 1− þ Am Am 7 6 εb ¼ εα  4  2 5 1− AA1 − AA2 m  ð3Þ  m  where; εb A2  dielectric constant of the base layer amplitude of the reﬂection from the base.  2.2. C++ processing library  Next, the amplitude proﬁles are transformed into layer thickness proﬁles as follows:  The processing tool considers two different methods commonly used during data acquisition for the calculation of layer thicknesses:  cΔ d ¼ pﬃﬃﬃ ε  ð4Þ  44  M. Varela-González et al. / Automation in Construction 45 (2014) 42–49  where the distance travelled by the radar-wave (d) is coincident with the thickness of the layer, c is the speed of light, Δt is the two-way travel-time distance between two different reﬂectors (layers), and ε is the dielectric constant for each corresponding layer calculated by Eqs. (2) and (3). The calculation method in terms of amplitude has been included to the library as reﬂected in Algorithm 2: Algorithm 2.  2.3. Software operation 2.3.1. Processing tool Two proprietary formats are accepted by the software developed for GPR data processing: Mala ﬁles and Pulse Ekko ﬁles. In turn, two input ﬁles are needed by each of these formats: .RAD and .RD3 extensions for the Mala format and .HD and .DT1 extensions for the Ekko format. In the case of the MALA format, the RAD ﬁles are ASCII ﬁles that store header information for GPR data conﬁguration (number of traces, frequency, etc.). An example of this header is shown in Fig. 1. RD3 data ﬁles are binary ﬁles that store registered data. The application works as follows: When the user presses the import button, a RD3 (or DT1) ﬁle is requested. If the corresponding RAD (or HD) ﬁle exists in the same folder, a radargram is built from the data and it is displayed into the main window, labelled as “GPR window” in Fig. 2. This main window is a visualisation and user interaction area that is divided in two principal parts: an area to manage input data (composed of 1, 2 and 3 subareas shown in Fig. 2) and an area to conﬁgure how the processed data are exported to an output ﬁle (subarea 4 in Fig. 2). Once a radargram graph is built from GPR data, a number of possible actions on the graph can be selected by the controls in Zone 1. These  Fig. 1. Header ﬁle example for GPR data conﬁguration in MALA format.  actions are executed by clicking on the radargram shown in Zone 2 and consist of the following: - New layer: used to add a new layer to the radargram by identifying the points in all traces with a similar amplitude to the clicked point from a selected phase previously desired by the technician. The layer is drawn in a random colour and it is loaded into the top of the list, highlighted in the same colour of the created layer. Notably, every action performed on the layer list has an effect on the radargram as well. - Layer correction: an unwanted deviation of the automatic assignment from the desired phase can be corrected after specifying from what position or trace of the proﬁle the existing pick requires to be replaced by a new automatically assigned pick. - Trace selection: when selected, a speciﬁc plot of the trace corresponding to a distance point clicked by the user on the radargram is displayed in Zone 3. This is equivalent to selecting a registered trace number using the control situated on top of Zone 3. - Show/Hide: the selected layer on the radargram can be hidden or shown. - Delete: used to delete the selected layer of the radargram; consequently, the layer will be deleted off the list. It is possible change the contrast of the radargram using the control above it. Increasing or decreasing the contrast value in the control will extend or reduce the amplitude range of the data showing on the radargram. To export the list of layers to a ﬁle, it is necessary to select a calculation method in Zone 4 and to introduce its corresponding parameters depending on the method. For the velocity method, the parameters consist of the transmission velocity for each layer except the last, and for the amplitude method, the necessary parameter is the amplitude of the metal plate reﬂection. If the entered parameters are correct, the user can press the save button and will then be asked to provide a path and ﬁlename. As a result of the export process a ﬁle with a .gpr extension and ASCII format will be created. This ﬁle contains a table structure as shown in Fig. 3, where the ﬁrst column represents the distance from the current point to the trajectory starting point. Successive columns represent the relative depths of the layers in the order of ascending total depth. The relative depth is deﬁned as the distance of a single layer to the next one. 2.3.2. Visualisation tool Once the ﬁles containing the layers' thickness have been obtained through the processing tool, they can be loaded into a visualisation application. This tool is capable of displaying the thickness values synchronised with the trajectory followed by the vehicle in which the GPS and GPR sensors were installed. To import the layer thicknesses ﬁle it is only necessary to press the import button and ﬁlter by .gpr extension to select an existing ﬁle. Initially, the data will be shown for a 1 meter distance, but it is possible to change this interval by using the mouse wheel over the graph. There is a continuous yellow vertical line that indicates the centre of the displayed data and a grey table displaying distance and depths for that point. The centre of the graph can be changed by clicking on any point, which will also change the range of data displayed. The graph may be linked to a previously loaded trajectory such that the current thickness data are shown for the geographic location indicated by a red dot on the trajectory. A navigation toolbar permits the user to move the location of the red dot (current position) on the trajectory. The movement interval for each step may be conﬁgured to 1, 5, 10 or 20 m and can be manual or automatic depending on the selection on the navigation tool bar. A table shows the coordinates of the current position in meters together with the trajectory alignment properties. The application layout is shown in Fig. 4.  M. Varela-González et al. / Automation in Construction 45 (2014) 42–49  45  Fig. 2. Functional division of the main window of the GPR data processor.  3. Results and discussion The semi-automatic software developed was analysed by processing the ﬁeld GPR data acquired in both ground- and air-coupled conﬁgurations. The GPR surveys were conducted using a central frequency of 2GHz. Data acquisition was carried out using the CO mode, and the parameters selected for acquisition were as follows: a total time window of 15 ns, 344 samples per trace, and 2 cm trace-intervals. This ﬁeld GPR data were acquired on an in-service road corresponding with a pavement structure composed of two layers of materials, an intermediate  Fig. 3. Structure of ﬁle with layer thicknesses.  course (type AC22 bin 50/70S) and a bituminous-treated base (type AC32 base 50/70G). Fig. 5 shows the GPR proﬁle obtained. Observing this radargram, the 2-GHz frequency provided the identiﬁcation of the reﬂection produced by the interface of the sub-base and base layers (yellow line at approximately 3.5 ns depth) and the reﬂection at the interface between the base and intermediate courses (orange line at 2.5 ns depth) in addition to the reﬂection by the air/ground interface (green line at 1.8 ns depth). The interfaces were identiﬁed because they showed a rather strong signal, which was produced by the large dielectric contrast between the different media. To process the ground-coupled data, previously calibrated radarwave velocities of propagation were used to characterise both concrete asphalts in the pavement: 11.3 and 11.9 cm/ns for the base course and the intermediate course, respectively. Using these radar-wave velocities, the entire proﬁles of the wave travel-time distance shown in Fig. 5 were transformed into layer thickness proﬁles. The travel-distance proﬁles detected were also transformed into thickness proﬁles using the amplitude method. To proceed with the method, a ﬂat metal plate was placed on the road surface and the amplitudes obtained at the interfaces between different layers were compared to the maximum amplitude produced by the metal plate. Then, the radar-wave velocities were calibrated from the permittivity values obtained by Eqs. (2) and (3). After calibration, the traveldistance or amplitude proﬁles were converted into thickness proﬁles. Fig. 6 shows the thickness proﬁles provided by the semi-automatic software by using both the velocity or core calibration method (A) and amplitude method (B). As shown in Fig. 6, the application displays the partial thickness obtained for the different layers in the pavement. The thickness proﬁle obtained by the amplitude method (B) showed more variation than the proﬁle obtained from the core calibration method. Therefore, the core calibration method demonstrated a higher stability of the radar-wave, which is very suitable to ensure an accurate estimation of layer thicknesses in road pavements. Ref. [23] reported  46  M. Varela-González et al. / Automation in Construction 45 (2014) 42–49  Fig. 4. GPR Viewer: layer thicknesses linked to a trajectory. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)  variations in amplitude of 1%, whereas the variations in time are practically insigniﬁcant. The rated aspects of the software were: the time required to load the GPR proﬁle, the time needed to automatically detect the wave traveltime distance proﬁle generated at the interface between different media and the time consumed to modify the wave travel-distance proﬁle picked by selecting another reﬂection. For the exhaustive testing of the software, three different processors of the same Intel® Core™ processor family (i3, i5 and i7 processors) were selected for the representation of low-, medium- and high-end processors. In general, the main difference between the i3, i5 and i7 processors is the performance, which is determined primarily by the multiprocessing capability, being directly related with the number of cores and the number of threads for each core. Table 1 describes the technical characteristics of the three computers where software tests were executed, all of them with 64-bit architecture [24]. To prove the dependency on the data set size for different hardware conﬁgurations, tests were performed for different lengths of GPR data which were obtained in distances between 100 m and 20 km. Fig. 7 shows a results graph for each tested aspect: load time, processing time and correcting time. For simplicity, the name of the processor is used to designate each hardware conﬁguration. For the three selected conﬁgurations, a similar load time is shown by the results, increasing slightly as the size of the data set grows. A clear difference in performance was perceived between the i3 conﬁguration and the i5 and i7 conﬁgurations, which obtain better and similar results.  As seen in the second graph, response differences for the implemented software to create a new layer are almost imperceptible between the i3 and i5 processors, supporting the i7 conﬁguration for heavier data sets. Virtually, only a trend change is observed for layer correction after a certain amount of data. Good results are obtained down to 4 km of data for the i3 processor, rising precipitously for higher distance values. The same trend was observed for the other two conﬁgurations up to approximately 5 km of data. An additional test was performed to evaluate the reproducibility of the algorithm elaborated. To do this, every layer was displayed 30 different times, and the proﬁles obtained were converted into thickness values. The process generated a total of 81,000 thickness values, which correspond to a representative sample for analysis. The reproducibility was obtained from the difference between the maximum and the minimum values calculated, which resulted in a difference of 0%. It was therefore demonstrated that the algorithm is well-preconditioned. Moreover, the visualisation tool developed can be displayed into a general visualisation viewer that allows for the integration of data collected from different sensors in a moving vehicle system for road inspection [25]. As illustrated in Fig. 8, the GPR data, as well as data acquired from other additional sensors, such as LiDAR and laser proﬁlometers, are referred to as common trajectory that combines the GPS trajectory with the observations from both the inertial navigation system (INS) and the distance measurement indicator (DMI). This approach provides the appropriate spatial integration when surveying with different NDT technologies.  Fig. 5. GPR data provided by the 2-GHz antenna showing the reﬂections identiﬁed at the different interfaces: air/ground (at 1.8 ns depth), intermediate/base (at 2.5 ns depth) and base/ sub-base (at 3.5 ns depth). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)  M. Varela-González et al. / Automation in Construction 45 (2014) 42–49  47  Fig. 6. Thickness proﬁle obtained from the interpretation of the 2-GHz radargram in Fig. 5, showing the partial thickness calculated for each layer in the pavement (layer 1—base, and layer 2—intermediate). The software developed allows for determining this thickness proﬁle by using two different methods: (A) core calibration and (B) amplitude method.  4. Conclusions GPR has demonstrated its capabilities as a valuable method for the quality assessment of pavement in transportation infrastructure. However, the large amount of data collected when surveying relevant infrastructure makes it difﬁcult to process all the data and manage it in a reasonable amount of time. More powerful and versatile processing tools are therefore demanded to optimise time and resources invested. In this context, new semi-automatic processing and visualisation tools for GPR data are presented in this paper.  Table 1 Technical characteristics of the computers used for executing software tests. Intel Core Processor  i3  i5  i7  i3-370 M  i5-3330  i7-3820  Number of cores  2  4  4  Number of threads  4  4  8  Clock speed  2.4 GHz  3 GHz  3.6 GHz  Smart cache  3 MB  6 MB  10 MB  RAM  4 GB  8 GB  16 GB  NVIDIA GeForce  NVIDIA GeForce  NVIDIA GeForce  Model  Memory  Graphics card  Processor number  Dedicated Shared  310 M  GT 520  GTX 670  512 MB  2048 MB  4096 MB  2233 MB  4095 MB  12006 MB  The purpose was to develop functional and versatile tools, while efﬁcient in terms of operability. The processing software was developed to process data acquired from either air- or ground-coupled operating modes, making it more versatile for potential use in such applications. Furthermore, an intuitive interface was designed to be used by nonexperienced users. The developed tool presented good processing times showing a low dependence on the computer hardware conﬁguration, especially concerning both processing and correcting times, which represent the procedures most commonly used during the semi-automatic layer recognition processes. The reduction in execution time allowed for a nearimmediate response in data processing even when handling large data sets. Another additional advantage of the software here developed corresponds to the size of the ﬁles you can import into the application. The software allows you to quickly import large ﬁles (or a ﬁle with a large number or radar traces). A major section of a road, or a large distance in traces, can therefore be analysed from a single ﬁle resulting in less overall operating time, less resources invested and faster diagnostics. Moreover, by using a common trajectory, the visualisation tool developed allows for the integration of data collected from different sensors in a moving vehicle system, which provides for a more exhaustive road inspection. The use of visualisation tools contributes to infrastructure assessment and management more efﬁciently by reducing management and maintenance costs.  Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial support from the Spanish Centre for Technological and Industrial Development (IDI201001770). The authors also wish to thank the company Extraco Construcciones y Proyectos S.A for providing the core measurements.  48  M. Varela-González et al. / Automation in Construction 45 (2014) 42–49  Additionally, this study is a contribution to the EU funded COST Action TU1208, “Civil Engineering Applications of Ground Penetrating Radar”. References  Fig. 7. The results obtained by the software developed. The load time (t1), processing time (t2) and correcting time (t3) depending on the length of the GPR proﬁle were compared. Moreover, three different processor families and computational resources (i3, i5 and i7 processors) were considered for the analysis.  [1] K.R. Maser, Non-destructive Measurement of Pavement Layer Thickness, Californian Department of Transportation, INFRASENSE Inc., 2003 [2] C. Fauchard, X. Dérobert, J. Cariou, Ph. Côte, GPR performances for thickness calibration on road test sites, NDT & E Int. 36 (2003) 66–75. [3] A. Benedetto, S. Pensa, Indirect diagnosis of pavement structural damages using surface GPR reﬂection techniques, J. Appl. Geophys. 62 (2007) 107–123. [4] G. Morcous, E. Erdogmus, Use of Ground Penetrating Radar for Construction Quality Assurance of Concrete Pavement, Nebraska Department of Roads, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, 2009. [5] M. Hartman, J. Baston-Pitt, A. Sedgwick, G. Böhmer, Pilot study assessing the feasibility of advanced ground penetrating radar in pavement assessment, Proceedings of the 8th Conf. Asphalt Pavements for Southern Africa (CAPSA '04), Sun City, South Africa, 2012, pp. 1224–1229. [6] H. Lorenzo, F.I. Rial, M. Pereira, M. Solla, A full non-metallic trailer for GPR road surveys, J. Appl. Geophys. 75 (2011) 490–497. [7] K. Maser, J. Puccinelli, J.K. Amestoy, Accuracy of ground penetrating radar asphalt thickness data and its impact on pavement rehabilitation design, Transportation Research Board Annual Meeting, Washington, USA, 2012. [8] I.L. Al-Qadi, S. Lahouar, A. Loulizi, Successful Application of GPR for Quality Assurance/Quality Control of New Pavements, Transportation Research Record No. 1861, January 12–16 2003. 86–97. [9] I.L. Al-Qadi, S. Lahouar, Measuring layer thicknesses with GPR — theory and practice, Construct. Build Mater. 19 (2005) 763–772. [10] A. Loizos, C. Plati, Accuracy of pavement thicknesses estimation using different ground penetrating radar analysis approaches, NDT & E Int. 40 (2007) 147–157. [11] R. Evans, M. Frost, M. Stonecliffe-Jones, N. Dixon, A review of pavement assessment using ground penetrating radar (GPR), Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Ground Penetrating Radar, June 16–19, Birmingham, UK, 2008. [12] M.O. Gordon, K. Broughton, M.S.A. Hardy, The assessment of the value of GPR imaging of ﬂexible pavements, NDT & E Int. 31 (1998) 429–438. [13] T. Saarenketo, P. Maijala, T. Herronen, Recommendations for Guidelines for the Use of GPR in Construction Quality Control, 2011. (32 pp., Rovaniemi). [14] W. Muller, A. Schuermann, B. Reeves, Quantitative moisture measurement of road pavements using 3D noise-modulated GPR, Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Ground-penetrating Radar, June 4–8, Shanghai (China), 2012, pp. 517–523. [15] J. Papí, M. Esteban, Infrastructure safety: “artiﬁcial vision real results”, Think. Highways 7 (2012) 46–48. [16] B. Stroustrup, The C++ Programming Language, Preface to the First Edition, third ed. Addison-Wesley, New Jersey, 1997. IX. [17] Qt project webpage, http://qt-project.org/ (accessed 05.26.2013). [18] Qwt user's guide webpage, http://qwt.sourceforge.net/ (accessed 05.26.2013). [19] MinGW webpage, http://www.mingw.org/ (accessed 05.26.2013).  Fig. 8. Visualisation of different sensor data referenced to the trajectory.  M. Varela-González et al. / Automation in Construction 45 (2014) 42–49 [20] P. Annan, GPR Principles, Procedures and Applications, Sensors and Software Inc., 2013 [21] T. Saarenketo, T. Scullion, Road evaluation with ground penetrating radar, J. Appl. Geophys. 43 (2000) 119–138. [22] T. Saarenketo, Electrical Properties of Road Materials and Subgrade Soils and the Use of Ground Penetrating Radar in Trafﬁc Infrastructure Surveys, Oulu University, Finland, 2006. [23] F.I. Rial, H. Lorenzo, M. Pereira, J. Armesto, Analysis of the emitted wavelet of highresolution bowtie GPR antennas, Sensors 9 (2009) 4230–4246.  49  [24] Intel webpage, Intel Core Processor family, http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/ en/processors/core/core-processor-family.html (accessed 06/06/2013). [25] J. Martínez-Sánchez, M. Nogueira, H. González-Jorge, M. Solla, P. Arias, SITEGI project: applying geotechnologies to road inspection, Sensor integration and software processing, ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, vol. II-5/W2, ISPRS Workshop Laser Scanning, Antalya, Turkey, Nov. 2013, pp. 181–186.  