Zhao 
Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) attribute analysis for archaeological prospection
2013 
Journal of Applied Geophysics  

Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) attribute analysis for archaeological prospection
Abstract
We evaluate the applicability and the effectiveness of the GPR attribute analysis for archaeological purposes and we test the attribute analysis on GPR data obtained in the river harbor area of the Aquileia Archaeological Park, NE Italy, where cultural heritage of the Roman imperial period is buried at different depths beneath a silty loam layer at an average depth not greater than 3–4 m. A multi-attribute approach is used to characterize the subsurface through several attribute categories, including instantaneous, section and volume attributes applied to quantities related not only to the reﬂection amplitude, but also to frequency and phase or other more complex parameters. The results allow the identiﬁcation of different buried archaeological remains, from brick walls to isolated stone chunks also in a very complex environment characterized by several interconnected or superimposed archaeological remains.
Introduction 
Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) is a non-invasive geophysical method for high-resolution imaging and characterization of shallow subsurface targets based on changes in the electro-magnetic properties of the materials (Davis and Annan, 1989). This method is currently applied in many different areas, such as geological studies (Chamberlain et al., 2000; Kruse et al., 2006; McClymont et al., 2008; Pipan et al., 2003), environmental contamination (Hughes, 2009; Johnson et al., 2007), geotechnical engineering (Corin et al., 1997; Orlando, 2003; Pettinelli et al., 1996), sedimentology (Davis and Annan, 1989; Grasmueck and Weger, 2002), glaciology (Fukui et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2008), and biomonitoring (Butnor et al., 2001; Nicolotti et al., 2003; Stokes et al., 2002). It has been extensively used in archaeological studies to map the spatial extent of buried cultural heritage in the last 40 years. GPR allows non-invasive pre-excavation subsurface imaging, which is very important because excavation of a site can destroy essential archaeological evidences (Francese et al., 2009; Nishimura and Goodman, 2000; Pipan et al., 1999, 2001; Shaaban et al., 2009).
GPR can efﬁciently and accurately map archaeological features or changes in the matrix of a site and ultimately identify the size, shape, depth, and location of buried cultural remains and related stratigraphy, which are always described by 2-D reﬂection proﬁles with excellent subsurface resolution (Conyers and Goodman, 1997). Such reﬂections can then be correlated between proﬁles throughout the grid, from which a better understanding of the spatial extent of targets is obtained. Usually rectangular grids are established with line spacing of 1 m or less (Gaffney et al., 2004; Leckebusch, 2003; Yalçiner et al., 2009). Moreover, using a series of 2-D proﬁles it is possible to arrange a 3-D volume, which can be analyzed and visualized in many different ways (e.g. Kadioglu, 2010; Lee et al., 2007; Nuzzo et al., 2002). As a matter of fact, present standards of 3-D GPR in archaeological prospection are based on “pseudo 3-D” volumes obtained combining series of 2-D proﬁles (Leucci and Negri, 2006; Neubauer et al., 2002), so the “2.5-D” expression seems to be more appropriate than the “3-D” one.
Time-slices are commonly used to display 3-D radar data, in which amplitudes are mapped at a constant two way travel-time (Goodman et al., 1995). Time-slices represent the easiest and most rapid way to provide a plan synthetical view of the anomaly pattern, especially for large areas (Nishimura and Kamei, 1990). However, horizontal slices may not be the best visualization technique in the case of great subsurface complexity such as in the case of structures buried at various depths, and/or showing an irregular morphology. To improve the quality and efﬁciency of the archaeological interpretation and to obtain more details of the archaeological targets, it is important to use numerous 3-D visualization techniques. Moreover, sophisticated, robust, and reliable quantitative information should be extracted from the processed 2-D GPR proﬁles and 3-D GPR volumes, besides amplitude and travel time: attribute analysis of radar data provides an effective tool on such purpose.
Attributes have been introduced into the analysis of reﬂection seismic exploration datasets since 1970s. They have signiﬁcantly improved the quality and efﬁciency of 3-D data interpretation in the petroleum industry with multi-attribute analysis and multidimensional attributes (Chopra and Alexeev, 2006; Gao, 2003; Marfurt et al., 1998). Seismic attributes are speciﬁc measurements of geometric, kinematic, dynamic or statistical features (Chen and Sidney, 1997). Seismic attribute analysis began with the search for “bright spots” in the early 1970s, and the initial attributes included instantaneous amplitude, phase and frequency. Seismic attribute technology has been advancing dramatically since then, and more seismic attributes have been introduced, such as surface-based attributes, volume-based attributes, complex trace attributes and amplitude variation with offset (AVO) (Chopra and Marfurt, 2007). However, the two main objectives of seismic attribute analysis are still to reveal features or patterns not visible on the original data and to extract additional qualitative and quantitative information from the analyzed dataset.
Although GPR techniques and seismic exploration differ radically concerning sources and measured physical parameters, GPR is based on the same wave theory (Ursin, 1983) and shares ﬁeld procedures that are commonly employed in seismic exploration. Therefore, processing and interpretation techniques used for seismic data may be applied to GPR datasets (Baker et al., 2001; Grasmueck, 1996). Young et al. (1997) ﬁrst applied seismic attributes to 3-D GPR data analysis. Remarkable advances in GPR attribute technology followed since then (e.g. Bradford et al., 2010; Forte et al., 2012; McClymont et al., 2008).
GPR attribute analysis maximizes the use of radar records as GPR attributes are potential indicators of meaningful subsurface changes in lithology and physical properties of archaeological interests. Attribute analysis can achieve maximum effectiveness when it is integrated with detailed quantitative archaeological and geological information collected from excavation studies.
We designed and completed a 2.5-D GPR survey and tested the performance of the GPR attribute analysis technology in the area of the Aquileia Archaeological Park, NE Italy. This site is characterized by several buried foundations and remains of walls, mixed with debris at depths ranging between about 0.5 and 4.0 m. The primary objective of the study was to test the applicability and the performances of the GPR attribute analysis to archaeological prospection in order to better locate, map and characterize the buried targets.
Test site 
The ancient Roman town of Aquileia is one important archaeological site located in north-eastern Italy (Fig. 1) nowadays still mainly covered by alluvial sediments with a shallow water table.
It was founded in the second century B.C. and rapidly became one of the most important ﬂuvial harbors of the Roman Empire, and it was also one of the largest and richest roman towns during the imperial period (Tavano, 1986). Aquileia was ﬁrst razed to the ground by Attila in the V century and was successively abandoned for approximately 250 years before the beginning of the IX century. During this period the whole area changed into a marsh due to an uncontrolled water supply from previously canalized streams. A layer of sediments of variable grain size (from sands to pelites) and average thickness not less than some meters deposited during this period. This layer is substantially preserved in wide sectors of the Aquileia Archaeological Park since the town never reached the extension of the imperial period again.
Moreover, a large part of the Aquileia Archaeological Park has not been yet explored and the ruins of several buildings are buried beneath a layer of material of thickness normally not exceeding 4 m. The Aquileia Archaeological Park is an ideal site to test the applicability of integrated geophysical methods, due to the variety of targets, the complex subsurface conditions and to the large amount of documentary evidences and archaeological excavations, which can be used in the calibration of the results.
In this study, we focus on GPR to provide new information about the buried cultural heritage and the stratigraphic sequence, with speciﬁc reference to the areas of the river harbor of the imperial town, which complements the results of archaeological excavations and the available documents. A mixture of debris and sediments ranging from sand to clay with archaeological remains made by different materials is found in the shallow layer and the resulting chaotic subsurface conditions are often responsible for the extremely poor signal to noise ratios in the GPR record obtained in the area, so GPR attribute analysis was tested in order to evaluate the capability to obtain more detailed archeological and geological information through an improved GPR data interpretation.
Methods 
A Malå Geoscience GPR system equipped with 250 MHz centralfrequency antennas was used to perform common offset data acquisition in a selected test site within the Aquileia Archaeological Park. A rectangular grid was established with a proﬁle spacing of 0.5 m and a trace distance from 0.05 m. 41 E–W proﬁles (ﬁrst trace, close to the border of archaeological excavations, at the east of the survey area), start from the Southern border of the grid towards North (Fig. 2). Each trace was 16 times vertically stacked in the ﬁeld in order to reduce incoherent noises; the sampling rate was set to 0.398 ns, considerably smaller than the Nyquist limit in order to avoid any possible aliasing of the data.
The basic GPR processing sequence included: data editing, geometry header deﬁnition, DC removal, amplitude analysis, spectral analysis, band-pass ﬁltering, background removal, true amplitude recovery, velocity analysis on the diffraction hyperbolas, and f–k migration. Topographic (static) correction was not applied because the surface topography was almost ﬂat. Radar-wave velocity measurements were further calculated from wide offset CMPs acquired on selected positions in the study area. For these measures we used two separated shielded antennas: one only as a “transmitter” and the other only as a “receiver”. The initial antenna separation was 40 cm with increment steps of 10 cm. The maximum reached offset was 400 cm.
According to the results of the velocity analysis based on both CMP and diffraction hyperbolas, EM wave velocity shows a general decreasing trend with values from about 10 cm/ns close to the surface to about 5.5 cm/ns at a time of 60 ns. This behavior is basically due to the effect of the local shallowest aquifer.
2-D proﬁle analysis before GPR attribute calculation is essential, because it allows to obtain some basic and effective information about the most apparent archaeological targets. However, GPR attribute analysis could maximize the efﬁcacy of GPR as a potential indicator of physical properties or variations/discontinuities related to possible archaeological targets. 2-D and 3-D attribute analyses have been critically tested and evaluated on the data obtained from the river harbor area in the Aquileia Archaeological Park.
There are different types of attribute calculations. Event-related attributes are generally difﬁcult to apply to GPR data, because, often, the picking of the surface cannot be done by automatic algorithms and can be impossible at all for data without continuous “geological”  structures such as horizons or well deﬁned layers. In any case such attribute extraction imposes an interpretive and not objective bias on the dataset. We thus considered that volume-based attributes could have signiﬁcant value for GPR data analysis and data-driven interpretation. Such attributes, calculated over the entire data volume or over a portion of them, can be analyzed on arbitrary slices (usually time-slices) without any interpreter constrain. Single-trace windowed attribute volumes can be calculated within a ﬁxed time window using the trace values inside the window. Multi-trace windowed attribute volumes can be generated for a ﬁxed time window by using, in addition to the upper and lower bounds, a limit for numbers of traces and a “pattern” of traces.
In this study, we calculated and critically evaluated the following attributes: Instantaneous amplitude
Instantaneous attributes are the products of complex signal theory, whose original application was the mathematical treatment of amplitude-modulated and frequency-modulated transmission (White, 1991). A record trace x(t) is represented as the real part of a complex valued signal A(t)ejΨ(t), where A(t) is the instantaneous amplitude and Ψ(t) is the instantaneous phase. The instantaneous amplitude (often called also “trace envelope” or “reﬂection strength”) computed sample by sample is the amplitude envelope of the GPR trace. Instantaneous amplitude variations of the selected data volume at the sample location mainly represent impedance contrasts, sequence boundaries, major changes in depositional environment, spatial correlations to porosity and, in general, variations in physical properties of the materials.
Cosine of instantaneous phase 
The cosine of instantaneous phase at the sample location emphasizes spatial continuity/discontinuity of reﬂections, not considering the amplitude of the events. Such attribute is of central importance since it describes the location of events in the trace and leads to the computation of other instantaneous quantities. The cosine of instantaneous phase makes weak events clearer and is also effective to highlight lateral discontinuities of the reﬂectors. Cosine of instantaneous phase has the same uses as instantaneous phase with an additional beneﬁt: it is continually smooth preventing the +/−180° discontinuity that plagues the instantaneous phase. Moreover, the cosine of instantaneous phase can be further processed (e.g. ﬁltered and stacked) using conventional processing tools.
Edge detection techniques 
Edge detection techniques are applied for seismic data analysis (Luo et al., 1996; Marfurt et al., 2002) and more generally for image processing. The basic principle is that a discontinuity can be interpreted as a sharp lateral phase variation and therefore can be detected as an “edge”. We applied an edge detection algorithm based on differences between adjacent signals (Luo et al., 1996) on 3-D GPR processed data volume. For seismic data, the removal of 3-D random noise is important before applying any edge detection algorithm because reﬂection data related with discontinuity zones are usually more complex and irregular (i.e. noisy) than areas with regular stratigraphy. Such noise removal can be considered as a pre-processing before edge detection application. The applied algorithm consists in a 2-D running average smoothing ﬁlter that blurs  sharp edges associated with discontinuities. The standard deviation is calculated within a (N × N) operator for any output location (i) and it is obtained by positioning the (N × N) window from the sample S[i + (N − 1)] to the sample S[i − (N − 1)]. After that operation on the window with the minimum standard deviation the amplitude average is computed, assigning this output value to the i-th location. Applying this process for all the output locations within a ﬁxed time window we obtain ﬁltered data with attenuated random noise. We applied noise removal and edge detection to identify lateral signal variations and discontinuities.
Dominant frequency 
Such attribute is the frequency component with the highest amplitude within a deﬁned time window. The speciﬁed time-gate is transformed to the Fourier domain and the requested output is calculated. The superposition of individual reﬂections may produce a frequency pattern, which characterizes the composite reﬂection. Spectral decomposition provides an alternative approach to evaluate the frequency content of a dataset. The frequency character of a composite reﬂection will change gradually as the sequence of layers gradually changes in thickness or composition of materials. Local variations of water in the soil tend to produce a rapid frequency change. Frequency variations can be evaluated and analyzed along one trace, between traces along the same proﬁle or within a 3-D volume.
Similarity
Coherence is deﬁned by waveform similarity of neighboring traces, which was originally developed to enhance discontinuities within seismic datasets often related to geological faulting (Bahorich and Farmer, 1995). Trace segments at two positions are compared and some numerical response is given to their coherency.
“Similarity” is a form of coherency that expresses how much two or more trace segments look alike (De Rooij and Tingdahl, 2002). Similarity is deﬁned by waveform similarity in both the in-line and cross-line directions. For two trace segments u(x,y,z) and v(x,y,z), the similarity attribute is deﬁned as 
Such attribute gives the value 1 if the trace segments are identical and zero if they have a phase-shift of 180°. This is comparable to the  cross-correlation of the trace segments, but similarity also responds to amplitudes and it returns trace-to-trace similarity properties.
Energy 
Such attribute calculates the squared sum of the sample values in the speciﬁed time-gate divided by the number of samples in the gate. If a generic trace segment has ‘n’ samples with amplitude ‘a’, the energy is deﬁned as:
The Energy is a measure of reﬂectivity in the speciﬁed time-gate. The higher is the amplitude, the higher is the energy. In addition, the energy can only be positive (like the reﬂection strength) and can be useful to emphasize low or irregular amplitude reﬂections. It is a simple and robust attribute to map 3-D GPR structures with a relatively low level of subjectivity.
Further mathematical details about the attribute calculation for GPR data can be found in Forte et al. (2012).
2-D proﬁle analysis and interpretation 
For any GPR data interpretation and especially for archaeological applications it is essential to consider and analyze the 2-D GPR proﬁles at ﬁrst separately, in order to estimate the main characteristics of buried targets. Continuity of reﬂections is usually better in the direction of data acquisition (inline) as the number of traces per distance unit is higher compared to the crossline direction. The processed (un-migrated) inline 21, was selected from the 41 proﬁles because it represents a typical section obtained in an archeological area, after a standard processing (Fig. 3).
From this section we can infer that buried potential archaeological targets are within the depth range between 10 ns and 70 ns, with several superimposed and interconnected structures, especially in the shallow part. Besides, we ﬁrst interpret the targets which can be identiﬁed in a selected GPR proﬁle, trying to correlate and extend the results to the neighbor ones (as Fig. 4 shows). In fact, if the extension of an archeological structure is large enough and the building materials/ depths are quite homogeneous, the correlation between contiguous GPR sections may be rather simple. Unfortunately, this situation is quite rare for archaeological applications, as in the present case, where there are several interconnected structures that are found at different depth levels at the same locations. For instance, according to the preliminary standard analysis results, the strong reﬂection, located at about 3 m in x direction (the strong reﬂection “A” in Fig. 3), seems to have no lateral continuity and therefore is probably related to a stone or a short wall, while the more laterally coherent anomalies, located at 23 m (the reﬂection “B”), 33 m (the reﬂection “C”), and 51 m (the reﬂection “D”), are consistent with large ruins of buildings (normally foundations of brickworks), but they are buried within a chaotic mixtures of sediments and debris. In any case such interpretation is just qualitative and limited details about the shape and the extension of the inferred structures can be derived.
2-D attribute analysis 
We tested 2-D attribute calculations to enhance the quantitative interpretation of archaeological targets.
Phase-related attributes can describe spatial continuity/discontinuity of reﬂections, so instantaneous phase can be used to identify layered media, continuous structures or, at the opposite, lateral changes. S/N ratio should be improved before attribute calculation, as random noise strongly contaminates the phase. The phase-related attributes are independent from the reﬂection amplitude; therefore, they can be used to interpret structures also when they are characterized by different reﬂectivities.
Fig. 5 shows that the structures of dimensions and shape compatible with a soil layer (the zone ‘a’ marked by white dotted rectangle) are identiﬁed by using the cosine of instantaneous phase attribute section. Such possible transitional layer separates a zone characterized by small and mainly discontinuous targets (above this level) and another zone characterized by structures with wider lateral extension (below the level), which could hardly be identiﬁed by using only the GPR amplitude records. Moreover, it is difﬁcult to deﬁne the near surface  7  archaeological targets according to the cosine of instantaneous phase attribute section because of the complicated overlaying of many buried structures and the low overall lateral continuity.
In order to highlight the coherent anomalies, we calculated the similarity on the cosine of instantaneous phase section (Fig. 6). There are different time windows selected to calculate the similarity attribute: time window is 0 in F ig. 6a (i.e. the calculations is just made on a single sample along the time-slice), while time window is [−1 ns, +1 ns] in Fig. 6b. Fig. 6 shows that a larger time window blurs the local imaging characteristics of the GPR 2-D proﬁle, but the resulting lateral resolution is much higher. Moreover, this quantity gives the maximum value if the data segments are identical and a value close to zero if they have a phase-shift of 180°. Therefore, zones with high similarity values are likely correlated with coherent and extended buried structures, and low similarity values are related with more chaotic patterns and heterogeneous materials. In addition, the size of data segments (time gates and trace segments) selected to calculate similarity depends on the expected dimensions of the targets and the desired resolution.
Fig. 7 contains the overlay of several different attributes: Fig. 7a is the overlay of reﬂection amplitude and the cosine of the instantaneous phase, which reﬂects the reﬂection intensity taking also into account the continuity of the subsurface materials, while Fig. 7b is the overlay of reﬂection amplitude, the cosine of instantaneous phase and the similarity. The results of multi-attribute combination encompass more quantities derived from GPR data than the simple amplitude proﬁle. Both the properties of archeological interest and depositional environment (inferred in Figs. 4, 5, and 6) can be visually integrated and better interpreted.
3-D attribute analysis
3-D (or 2.5-D) data analysis is mandatory if the objective of the GPR survey is to map the potential archaeological targets in terms of extension, shape, and depth and above all to infer the physical properties of the imaged structures.
Fig. 8a shows the amplitude time-slice at 52 ns for the whole study area, calculated on the migrated volume. From this picture we can get some information about potential archaeological remains, but it is really difﬁcult to identify coherent anomalies and the overall outline of the buried remains is vague, as there are strong lateral phase discontinuities, diffuse scattering zones and superposition of targets at different depths in the same location. Fig. 8b shows the instantaneous amplitude slice calculated on the un-migrated volume at 52 ns, while Fig. 8c shows the results obtained with a similar  calculation made on migrated data. In the latter case several geometrically coherent anomalies are more clearly imaged (white arrows), as migration focuses diffracted energy. Migration is not a standard technique in the GPR processing ﬂow especially in environments where the EM velocity varies both vertically and laterally. Sometimes it is better to analyze both migrated and un-migrated GPR proﬁles to identify subsurface anomalies mainly related to scattered energy. In any case it is always essential to apply migration algorithms in order to reconstruct the real position of subsurface features and to properly image their geometrical parameters as Fig. 8 shows.
We also tested other attributes to emphasize the lateral limits of the detected subsurface structures. On such purpose, we tested some edge enhancing ﬁlters and spectral related attributes (Figs. 9 and 10). Edge enhancing ﬁlter can be used to emphasize the effects of the “edges”, i.e. of any lateral discontinuity. We tested different ﬁlter sizes: the square matrix of the ﬁlter operator was set to ‘5’ in Fig. 9a while the square matrix of the ﬁlter operator was set to ‘9’ in Fig. 9b. We can see that higher ﬁlter sizes tend to blur the edges or borders between the different domains.
Dominant frequency (Fig. 10a) shows an example of a highly elusive target, namely a road close to the foundations. The frequency values of the areas without archaeological remains are considerably higher probably due to a lower S/N ratio. In this case, the contrast in physical properties is given by the different materials of the road compared to the surrounding structures and sediments. In the example, the dominant frequency is close to 130 MHz for the archaeological targets with a mean velocity of 6 cm/ns, the corresponding wavelength is 0.46 m. According to this value, the analysis window was set to 7.56 ns (20 samples) since shorter or longer windows would introduce artifacts or decrease the overall resolution of the analysis.
Fig. 10b provides the overlay of instantaneous amplitude, edge enhancing ﬁlter and dominant frequency. The overall interpretability is remarkably enhanced since the position and the extension of the long archaeological structures (mainly wall remains) are clearer and can be easily mapped on different depth time-slices.
The Energy is a good measurement of the overall reﬂectivity in a speciﬁed time window. In Fig. 11, we can observe several potential archaeological features having depth position in the range 12 ns–52 ns revealed through the energy attribute, which is a simple and robust parameter to map 3-D GPR reﬂections with a relative low level of subjectivity. A general criterion to select the time window is to use a length similar to the period of the dominant wavelength. Since 250 MHz central-frequency antennas were used in this test area and considering that spectral shifting towards low frequencies always happens, a time window of [− 2.5 ns, + 2.5 ns] centered at the selected analysis position was the best trade-off, at different depths between 12 ns and 52 ns (Fig. 11). The arrows indicate the main targets, which are often superposed and sometimes interconnected.
Discussions and conclusions 
The quest for buried archaeological remains requires a detailed knowledge of the shallow subsurface and a methodological approach designed to deﬁne areas of maximum interest where surface data collection and successive excavation should be planned. Geophysical surveys are crucial to identify targets of potential archaeological interest before planning excavation. Such targets can be laterally continuous reﬂections, for instance related to foundations of the buildings, but also localized interruptions of the reﬂectors, whose distribution can be easily correlated only in the 3-D analysis, like in the present study.
Standard interpretation of 2-D GPR proﬁles provides intuitive and effective subsurface information in simple or relatively simple situations, but 2-D GPR attribute analysis can integrate such information with details of the targets, which are indicators of meaningful subsurface changes in physical properties of archaeological interests. In this paper, objects of dimensions and shape compatible with soil layers, transitional layers separating two zones characterized by discontinuous/continuous targets, were interpreted using the cosine of instantaneous phase attribute. Furthermore, the similarity was calculated to better highlight the coherent anomalies on the cosine of instantaneous phase attribute section.
The extension to 3-D attribute analysis allows enhanced identiﬁcation of size, shape, and location of buried cultural remains at different depths. The energy attribute (Fig. 11) shows several potential archaeological features with different shapes, dimensions and positions in depth. Additionally, several geometrically coherent anomalies at about 52 ns, with complex subsurface conditions, were characterized using the instantaneous amplitude. Edge enhancing ﬁlters were used to identify the edges of the geometrically coherent anomalies (such as the buried continuous foundation of cultural remains), and dominant frequency was also used to detect the road close to the foundations based on the contrast in physical properties between the road and the surrounding structures and sediments.
In synthesis, amplitude-related attributes are the most common attributes in GPR applications, as they can recognize subsurface lithological variations, reﬂect the soil characteristic variations, and highlight the main lateral changes. The “energy” is a simple and robust attribute to map the 3-D GPR horizons with a relatively low level of subjectivity. The phase is continuous in electromagnetic wave propagation through isotropic media, but it changes dramatically if there are media with different EM properties. Therefore phase-related attributes can be used to identify the continuity/discontinuity of the subsurface targets also when the amplitude is not constant. Besides, frequency-related attributes are sensitive to attenuation and allow the identiﬁcation of zones where dielectric materials with higher loss exist, which could be further related to water content and variations in the physical properties of the materials. Similarity is another useful coherency attribute in the analysis of both 2-D proﬁles and 3-D horizon slices: it can be used to calculate the similarity of data segments on the original amplitude, or on the derived phase and frequency attributes. Furthermore, edge enhancing ﬁlters are useful to identify the edges of geometrically coherent anomalies, which often are the most clear archaeological indicator in complicated situations where there are different superposed levels of interest.
Moreover, it is always important to migrate GPR data before attribute analysis, especially for the 3-D case otherwise the potential of the attributes is partially reduced. In addition, we demonstrated that in very complex environments it is essential to use multi-attribute overlay to obtain detailed information about stratigraphy and location of targets of potential interest. Although radar attribute analysis may partly substitute the subjective estimation of the interpreter, the integration of 2-D and 3-D attribute analysis enhances accuracy of the ﬁnal interpretation and provides more details about archaeological and geological features. By combining information embedded in different signal characteristics, we can obtain enhanced data for standard or computer aided (e.g. neural-network based) interpretation. The prominent enhancement of the subsurface images obtained by means of multi-attribute overlay technique, compared with the conventional radar section, indicates that multi-attribute overlay method is well suited for the application to high resolution studies in archeology. The successful use of this new technique could greatly improve the effects of interpretation of GPR data in any archaeological prospection, especially in areas characterized by low signal-to-noise ratios and highly heterogeneous environments. Semi-automatic classiﬁcation techniques (e.g. neural network clustering) can further improve the results and reduce the overall level of subjectivity in the interpretation of the results.
Acknowledgments 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the BAAAS Superintendency of Friuli Venezia Giulia. We are grateful to Dr. Francesca Maselli Scotti, former Director of the Aquileia National Museum, for granting access to the investigated area and providing historical information. We also thank dGB Earth Sciences for providing OpendTect open source seismic data analysis software, and two anonymous reviewers for providing thoughtful and useful suggestions.

Figures
Location map of Aquileia Archaeological Park, northern Italy.
Location map of the GPR survey and details about the geometry, and the arrangement of the data acquisition grid.
Example of 2-D processed (un-migrated) GPR amplitude proﬁle (inline 21). The arrows show some reﬂection examples at different positions. A- (3 m, 10 ns); B- (23 m, 25 ns); C- (33 m, 18 ns); and D- (51 m, 40 ns).
Combination of different parallel 2-D full-processed GPR amplitude proﬁles. Some lateral correlations are apparent, but the subjectivity level is in any case quite high (see details in the text).
Cosine of instantaneous phase calculated on a full processed GPR proﬁle (in-line 21). ‘a’ marks a transitional zone between discontinuous shallow structures and more continuous possible deep archaeological remains.
Similarity attribute calculated on the cosine of instantaneous phase attribute volume (in-line 21). (a) Time window calculated is 0; and (b) time window calculated is [−1, +1].
Attribute overlay. (a) Reﬂection amplitude with cosine of instantaneous phase superimposed; (b) reﬂection amplitude, with cosine of instantaneous phase and similarity superimposed.
Comparison between the reﬂection amplitude, i.e. the standard parameter considered for the interpretation (a), the instantaneous amplitude calculated on un-migrated data volume (b) and the instantaneous amplitude calculated on the migrated data volume (c).
Comparison of edge enhancing ﬁlters for different square matrices of the ﬁlter operator. (a) The square matrix of the ﬁlter operator is 5; and (b) the square matrix of the ﬁlter operator is 9.
Example of attribute application to detect archaeological remains and emphasize their extension and lateral limits (time-slice at 52 ns). (a) Dominant frequency; and (b) overlay of instantaneous amplitude, edge enhancing ﬁlter and dominant frequency.
The result of energy attribute calculated for several time-slices with increasing depths (12 ns, 20 ns, 28 ns, 38 ns, and 52 ns). White arrows highlight some archaeological remains.